of sky and sea, but without grandeur, and robbed of their native
grace by navvy-hewing, which for the most part makes of them a mere
embankment: their verdure stripped away, their juttings tunnelled, along
their base the steel parallels of smoky traffic. Dawlish and Teignmouth
have in themselves no charm; hotel and lodging-house, shamed by the
soft pure light that falls about them, look blankly seaward, hiding what
remains of farm or cottage in the older parts. Ebb-tide uncovers no fair
stretch of sand, and at flood the breakers are thwarted on a bulwark of
piled stone, which supports the railway, or protects a promenade.

But inland these discontents are soon forgotten; there amid tilth and
pasture, gentle hills and leafy hollows of rural Devon, the eye rests
and the mind is soothed. By lanes innumerable, deep between banks of
fern and flower; by paths along the bramble-edge of scented meadows;
by the secret windings of copse and brake and stream-worn valley--a way
lies upward to the long ridge of Haldon, where breezes sing among the
pines, or sweep rustling through gorse and bracken. Mile after mile
of rustic loveliness, ever and anon the sea-limits blue beyond grassy
slopes. White farms dozing beneath their thatch in harvest sunshine;
hamlets forsaken save by women and children, by dogs and cats and
poultry, the labourers afield. Here grow the tall foxgloves, bending a
purple head in the heat of noon; here the great bells of the convolvulus
hang thick from lofty hedges, massing their pink and white against dark
green leafage; here amid shadowed undergrowth trail the long fronds
of lustrous hartstongue; wherever the eye falls, profusion of summer's
glory. Here, in many a nook carpeted with softest turf, canopied with
tangle of leaf and bloom, solitude is safe from all intrusion--unless it
be that of flitting bird, or of some timid wild thing that rustles for a
moment and is gone. From dawn to midnight, as from midnight to dawn, one
who would be alone with nature might count upon the security of these
bosks and dells.

By Nancy Lord and her companions such pleasures were unregarded. For the
first few days after their arrival at Teignmouth, they sat or walked on
the promenade, walked or sat on the pier, sat or walked on the Den--a
long, wide lawn, decked about with shrubs and flower-beds, between
sea-fronting houses and the beach. Nancy had no wish to exert herself,
for the weather was hot; after her morning bathe with Jessica, she found
amusement enough in watching the people--most of whom were here simply
to look at each other, or in listening to the band, which played
selections from Sullivan varied with dance music, or in reading a novel
from the book-lender's,--that is to say, gazing idly at the page, and
letting such significance as it possessed float upon her thoughts.

She was pleasantly conscious that the loungers who passed by, male and
female, gave something of attention to her face and costume. Without
attempting to rival the masterpieces of fashion which invited envy or
wonder from all observers, she thought herself nicely dressed, and had
in fact, as always, made good use of her father's liberality. Her taste
in garments had a certain timidity that served her well; by avoiding the
extremes of mode, and in virtue of her admirable figure, she took the
eye of those who looked for refinement rather than for extravagance. The
unconsidered grace of her bearing might be recognised by all whom such
things concerned; it by no means suggested that she came from a small
house in Camberwell. In her companions, to be sure, she was unfortunate;
but the over-modest attire and unimpressive persons of Mrs. Morgan and
Jessica at least did her the office of relief by contrast.

Nancy had made this reflection; she was not above it. Yet her actual
goodness of heart saved her from ever feeling ashamed of the Morgans. It
gratified her to think that she was doing them a substantial kindness;
but for her, they would have dragged through a wretched summer in their
unwholesome, jimcrack house, without a breath of pure air, without a
sight of the free heaven. And to both of them that would probably have
meant a grave illness.

Mrs. Morgan was a thin, tremulous woman, with watery eyes and a singular
redness about the prominent part of her face, which seemed to indicate a
determination of blood to the nose. All her married life had been spent
in a cheerless struggle to maintain the externals of gentility. Not
that she was vain or frivolous--indeed her natural tendencies made for
homeliness in everything--but, by birth and by marriage connected with
genteel people, she felt it impossible to abandon that mode of living
which is supposed to distinguish the educated class from all beneath it.
She had brought into the world three sons and three daughters; of the
former, two were dead, and of the latter, one,--in each case, poverty of
diet having proved fatal to a weak constitution. For close upon thirty
years the family had lived in houses of which the rent was out of all
reasonable proportion to their means; at present, with a total income
of one hundred and sixty pounds (Mr. Morgan called himself a commission
agent, and seldom had anything to do), they paid in rent and rates a
matter of fifty-five, and bemoaned the fate which neighboured them with
people only by courtesy to be called gentlefolk. Of course they kept
a servant,--her wages nine pounds a year. Whilst the mother and elder
daughter were at Teignmouth, Mr Morgan, his son, and the younger girl
felt themselves justified in making up for lack of holiday by an extra
supply of butcher's meat.

Well-meaning, but with as little discretion in this as in other things,
Mrs. Morgan allowed scarce an hour of the day to pass without uttering
her gratitude to Nancy Lord for the benefit she was enjoying. To escape
these oppressive thanks, Nancy did her best never to be alone with the
poor lady; but a _tete-a-tete_ was occasionally unavoidable, as, for
instance, on the third or fourth day after their arrival, when Mrs.
Morgan had begged Nancy's company for a walk on the Den, whilst Jessica
wrote letters. At the end of a tedious hour Jessica joined them, and her
face had an unwonted expression. She beckoned her friend apart.

'You'll be surprised. Who do you think is here?'

'No one that will bore us, I hope.'

'Mr. Tarrant. I met him near the post-office, and he stopped me.'

Nancy frowned.

'Are they all here again?'

'No; he says he's alone.--One minute, mamma; please excuse us.'

'He was surprised to see you?' said Nancy, after reflecting.

'He said so. But--I forgot to tell you--in a letter to Mrs. Baker I
spoke of our plans. She had written to me to propose a pupil for after
the holidays.--Perhaps she didn't mention it to Mr. Tarrant.'

'Evidently not!' Nancy exclaimed, with some impatience. 'Why should you
doubt his word?'

'I can't help thinking'--Jessica smiled archly--'that he has come just
to meet--somebody.'

'Somebody? Who do you mean?' asked her friend, with a look of sincere
astonishment.

'I may be mistaken'--a glance completed the suggestion.

'Rubbish!'

For the rest of that day the subject was unmentioned. Nancy kept rather
to herself, and seemed meditative. Next morning she was in the same
mood. The tide served for a bathe at eleven o'clock; afterwards, as
the girls walked briskly to and fro near the seat where Mrs. Morgan had
established herself with a volume of Browning,--Jessica insisted on her
reading Browning, though the poor mother protested that she scarcely
understood a word,--they came full upon the unmistakable presence of Mr.
Lionel Tarrant. Miss. Morgan, in acknowledging his salute, offered her
hand; it was by her that the young man had stopped. Miss. Lord only bent
her head, and that slightly. Tarrant expected more, but his half-raised
hand dropped in time, and he directed his speech to Jessica. He had
nothing to say but what seemed natural and civil; the dialogue--Nancy
remained mute--occupied but a few minutes, and Tarrant went his way,
sauntering landwards.

As Mrs. Morgan had observed the meeting, it was necessary to offer her
an explanation. But Jessica gave only the barest facts concerning their
acquaintance, and Nancy spoke as though she hardly knew him.

The weather was oppressively hot; in doors or out, little could be done
but sit or lie in enervated attitudes, a state of things accordant with
Nancy's mood. Till late at night she watched the blue starry sky from
her open window, seeming to reflect, but in reality wafted on a stream
of fancies and emotions. Jessica's explanation of the arrival of Lionel
Tarrant had strangely startled her; no such suggestion would have
occurred to her own mind. Yet now, she only feared that it might not
be true. A debilitating climate and absolute indolence favoured that
impulse of lawless imagination which had first possessed her on the
evening of Jubilee Day. With luxurious heedlessness she cast aside every
thought that might have sobered her; even as she at length cast off all
her garments, and lay in the warm midnight naked upon her bed.

The physical attraction of which she had always been conscious in
Tarrant's presence seemed to have grown stronger since she had dismissed
him from her mind. Comparing him with Luckworth Crewe, she felt only a
contemptuous distaste for the coarse vitality and vigour, whereto
she had half surrendered herself, when hopeless of the more ambitious
desire.

Rising early, she went out before breakfast, and found that a little
rain had fallen. Grass and flowers were freshened; the air had an
exquisite clearness, and a coolness which struck delightfully on the
face, after the close atmosphere within doors. She had paused to watch a
fishing-boat off shore, when a cheery voice bade her 'good-morning,' and
Tarrant stepped to her side.

'You are fond of this place,' he said.

'Not particularly.'

'Then why do you choose it?'

'It does for a holiday as well as any other.'

He was gazing at her, and with the look which Nancy resented, the look
which made her feel his social superiority. He seemed to observe her
features with a condescending gratification. Though totally ignorant of
his life and habits, she felt a conviction that he had often bestowed
this look upon girls of a class below his own.

'How do you like those advertisements of soaps and pills along the
pier?' he asked carelessly.

'I see no harm in them.'

Perversity prompted her answer, but at once she remembered Crewe, and
turned away in annoyance. Tarrant was only the more good-humoured.

'You like the world as it is? There's wisdom in that. Better be in
harmony with one's time, advertisements and all.' He added, 'Are you
reading for an exam?'

'I? You are confusing me with Miss. Morgan.'

'Oh, not for a moment! I couldn't possibly confuse you with any one
else. I know Miss. Morgan is studying professionally; but I thought you
were reading for your own satisfaction, as so many women do now-a-days.'

The distinction was flattering. Nancy yielded to the charm of his voice
and conversed freely. It began to seem not impossible that he found some
pleasure in her society. Now and then he dropped a word that made her
pulses flutter; his eyes were constantly upon her face.

'Don't you go off into the country sometimes?' he inquired, when she had
turned homewards.

'We are thinking of having a drive to-day.'

'And I shall most likely have a ride; we may meet.'

Nancy ordered a carriage for the afternoon, and with her friends drove
up the Teign valley; but they did not meet Tarrant. But next morning
he joined them on the pier, and this time Jessica had no choice but to
present him to her mother. Nancy felt annoyed that this should have come
about; Tarrant, she supposed, would regard poor Mrs. Morgan with secret
ridicule. Yet, if that were his disposition, he concealed it perfectly;
no one could have behaved with more finished courtesy. He seated
himself by Mrs. Morgan, and talked with her of the simplest things in a
pleasant, kindly humour. Yesterday, so he made known, he had ridden to
Torquay and back, returning after sunset. This afternoon he was going by
train to Exeter, to buy some books.

Again he strolled about with Nancy, and talked of idle things with an
almost excessive amiability. As the girl listened, a languor crept upon
her, a soft and delicious subdual of the will to dreamy luxury. Her
eyes were fixed on the shadows cast by her own figure and that of her
companion. The black patches by chance touched. She moved so as to part
them, and then changed her position so that they touched again--so that
they blended.



CHAPTER 5



Nancy had written to her father, a short letter but affectionate,
begging him to let her know whether the improvement in his health, of
which he had spoken before she left home, still continued. The answer
came without delay. On the whole, said Mr. Lord, he was doing well
enough; no need whatever to trouble about him. He wrote only a few
lines, but closed with 'love to you, my dear child,' an unwonted
effusiveness.

At the same time there came a letter from Horace.

'You will be surprised,' it began, 'at the address I write from. As you
know, I had planned to go to Brighton; but on the day before my holiday
commenced I heard from F. F., saying that she and Mrs. Peachey had had a
quarrel, and she was tired of Brighton, and was coming home. So I waited
a day or two, and then, as I had half promised, I went to see Mrs. D.
We had a long talk, and it ended in my telling her about F., and all the
row there's been. Perhaps you will think I had better have kept it to
myself, but Mrs. D. and I are on first-rate terms, and she seems
to understand me better than any one I ever met. We talked about my
holiday, and she persuaded me to come to Scarborough, where she herself
was going for a week or two. It's rather an expensive affair, but worth
the money. Of course I have lodgings of my own. Mrs. D. is at a big
hotel, where friends of hers are staying. I have been introduced to two
or three people, great swells, and I've had lunch with Mrs. D. at the
hotel twice. This kind of life suits me exactly. I don't think I get on
badly with the swells. Of course I say not a word about my position, and
of course nobody would think of asking questions. You would like this
place; I rather wish you were here. Of course father thinks I have come
on my own hook. It's very awkward having to keep a secret of this kind;
I must try and persuade Mrs. D. to have a talk with father. But one
thing I can tell you,--I feel pretty sure that she will get me, somehow
or other, out of that beastly City life; she's always talking of things
I might do. But not a word to any one about all this--be sure.'

This news caused Nancy to ponder for a long time. The greater part of
the morning she spent at home, and in her own room; after lunch, she sat
idly on the promenade, little disposed for conversation.

It was the second day since Tarrant had told her that he was going to
Exeter, and they had not again met; the Morgans had not seen him either.
The next morning, however, as all three were sitting in one of their
favourite places, Tarrant approached them. Mrs. Morgan, who was
fluttered by the natural supposition of a love affair between Miss. Lord
and the interesting young man, made it easy for them to talk together.

'Did you get your books?' Nancy asked, when silence followed on
trivialities.

'Yes, and spent half a day with them in a favourite retreat of mine,
inland. It's a very beautiful spot. I should like you to see it. Indeed,
you ought to.'

Nancy turned her eyes to the sea.

'We might walk over there one afternoon,' he added.

'Mrs. Morgan can't walk far.'

'Why should we trouble her? Are you obliged to remain under Mrs.
Morgan's wing?'

It was said jestingly, but Nancy felt piqued.

'Certainly not. I am quite independent.'

'So I should have supposed. Then why not come?'

He seemed perfectly self-possessed, but the voice was not quite his own.
To Nancy, her eyes still looking straight forward, it sounded as though
from a distance; it had an effect upon her nerves similar to that she
had experienced three days ago, when they were walking about the pier.
Her hands fell idly; she leaned back more heavily on the seat; a weight
was on her tongue.

'A country ramble of an hour or two,' pursued the voice, which itself
had become languorous. 'Surely you are sometimes alone? It isn't
necessary to give a detailed account of your time?'

She answered impatiently. 'Of course not.' In this moment her thoughts
had turned to Luckworth Crewe, and she was asking herself why this
invitation of Tarrant's affected her so very differently from anything
she had felt when Crewe begged her to meet him in London. With him
she could go anywhere, enjoying a genuine independence, a complete
self-confidence, thinking her unconventional behaviour merely good fun.
Tarrant's proposal startled her. She was not mistress of the situation,
as when trifling with Crewe. A sense of peril caused her heart to beat
quickly.

'This afternoon, then,' the voice was murmuring.

She answered mechanically. 'It's going to rain, I think.'

'I think not. But, if so, to-morrow.'

'To-morrow is Sunday.'

'Yes. Monday, then.'

Nancy heard him smother a laugh. She wished to look at him, but could
not.

'It won't rain,' he continued, still with the ease of one who speaks of
everyday matters. 'We shall see, at all events. Perhaps you will want to
change your book at the library.' A novel lay on her lap. 'We'll leave
it an open possibility--to meet there about three o'clock.'

Nancy pointed out to sea, and asked where the steamer just passing might
be bound for. Her companion readily turned to this subject.

The rain--she half hoped for it--did not come. By luncheon-time every
doubtful cloud had vanished. Before sitting down to table, she observed
the sky at the open window.

'Lovely weather!' sighed Mrs. Morgan behind her. 'But for you, dear
Nancy, I should have been dreaming and wishing--oh, how vainly!--in the
stifling town.'

'We'll have another drive this afternoon,' Nancy declared.

'Oh, how delightful! But pray, pray, not on our account--'

'Jessica,'--Nancy turned to her friend, who had just entered the
room,--'we'll have the carriage at three. And a better horse than last
time; I'll take good care of that. Pen, ink, and paper!' she cried
joyously. 'The note shall go round at once.'

'You're a magnificent sort of person,' said Jessica. 'Some day, no
doubt, you'll keep a carriage and pair of your own.'

'Shan't I, just! And drive you down to Burlington House, for your exams.
By-the-bye, does a female Bachelor of Arts lose her degree if she gets
married?'

Nancy was sprightlier than of late. Her mood maintained itself
throughout the first half of the drive, then she seemed to be overcome
by a sudden weariness, ceased to talk, and gave only a listless look at
things which interested her companions. By when they reached home again,
she had a pale troubled countenance. Until dinner nothing more was seen
of her, and after the meal she soon excused herself on the plea of a
headache.

Again there passed two days, Sunday and Monday, without Tarrant's
appearing. Mrs. Morgan and Jessica privately talked much of the
circumstance. Sentimental souls, they found this topic inexhaustible;
Jessica, having her mind thus drawn away from Burlington House,
benefited not a little by the mystery of her friend's position;
she thought, however, that Nancy might have practised a less severe
reticence. To Mrs. Morgan it never occurred that so self-reliant a
young woman as Miss. Lord stood in need of matronly counsel, of strict
chaperonage; she would have deemed it an impertinence to allow herself
the most innocent remark implying such a supposition.

On Wednesday afternoon, about three o'clock, Nancy walked alone to the
library. There, looking at books and photographs in the window, stood
Lionel Tarrant. He greeted her as usual, seemed not to remark the hot
colour in her cheeks, and stepped with her into the shop. She had meant
to choose a novel, but, with Tarrant looking on, felt constrained to
exhibit her capacity for severe reading. The choice of grave works was
not large, and she found it difficult to command her thoughts even for
the perusal of titles; however, she ultimately discovered a book that
promised anything but frivolity, Helmholtz's 'Lectures on Scientific
Subjects,' and at this she clutched.

Two loudly-dressed women were at the same time searching the shelves.

'I wonder whether this is a pretty book?' said one to the other, taking
down a trio of volumes.

'Oh, it looks as if it might be pretty,' returned her friend, examining
the cover.

They faced to the person behind the counter.

'Is this a pretty book?' one of them inquired loftily.

'Oh yes, madam, that's a very pretty book--very pretty.'

Nancy exchanged a glance with her companion and smiled. When they were
outside again Tarrant asked:

'Have you found a pretty book?'

She showed the title of her choice.

'Merciful heavens! You mean to read that? The girls of to-day! What mere
man is worthy of them? But--I must rise to the occasion. We'll have a
chapter as we rest.'

Insensibly, Nancy had followed the direction he chose. His words took
for granted that she was going into the country with him.

'My friends are on the pier,' she said, abruptly stopping.

'Where doubtless they will enjoy themselves. Let me carry your book,
please. Helmholtz is rather heavy.'

'Thanks, I can carry it very well. I shall turn this way.'

'No, no. My way this afternoon.'

Nancy stood still, looking up the street that led towards the sea.
She was still bright-coloured; her lips had a pathetic expression, a
child-like pouting.

'There was an understanding,' said Tarrant, with playful firmness.

'Not for to-day.'

'No. For the day when you disappointed me. The day after, I didn't think
it worth while to come here; yesterday I came, but felt no surprise that
I didn't meet you. To-day I had a sort of hope. This way.'

She followed, and they walked for several minutes in silence.

'Will you let me look at Helmholtz?' said the young man at length. 'Most
excellent book, of course. "Physiological Causes of Harmony in Music,"
"Interaction of Natural Forces," "Conservation of Force."--You enjoy
this kind of thing?'

'One must know something about it.'

'I suppose so. I used to grind at science because everybody talked
science. In reality I loathed it, and now I read only what I like.
Life's too short for intellectual make-believe. It is too short for
anything but enjoyment. Tell me what you read for pure pleasure.
Poetry?'

They had left the streets, and were pursuing a road bordered with
gardens, gardens of glowing colour, sheltered amid great laurels,
shadowed by stately trees; the air was laden with warm scents of flower
and leaf. On an instinct of resistance, Nancy pretended that the
exact sciences were her favourite study. She said it in the tone
of superiority which habit had made natural to her in speaking of
intellectual things. And Tarrant appeared to accept her declaration
without scepticism; but, a moment after, he turned the talk upon novels.

Thus, for half an hour and more, they strolled on by upward ways, until
Teignmouth lay beneath them, and the stillness of meadows all about.
Presently Tarrant led from the beaten road into a lane all but overgrown
with grass. He began to gather flowers, and offered them to Nancy.
Personal conversation seemed at an end; they were enjoying the brilliant
sky and the peaceful loveliness of earth. They exchanged simple, natural
thoughts, or idle words in which was no thought at all.

Before long, they came to an old broken gate, half open; it was the
entrance to a narrow cartway, now unused, which descended windingly
between high thick hedges. Ruts of a foot in depth, baked hard by
summer, showed how miry the track must be in the season of rain.

'This is our way,' said Tarrant, his hand on the lichened wood. 'Better
than the pier or the promenade, don't you think?'

'But we have gone far enough.'

Nancy drew back into the lane, looked at her flowers, and then shaded
her eyes with them to gaze upward.

'Almost. Another five minutes, and you will see the place I told you of.
You can't imagine how beautiful it is.'

'Another day--'

'We are all but there--'

He seemed regretfully to yield; and Nancy yielded in her turn. She
felt a sudden shame in the thought of having perhaps betrayed timidity.
Without speaking, she passed the gate.

The hedge on either side was of hazel and dwarf oak, of hawthorn and
blackthorn, all intertwined with giant brambles, and with briers
which here and there met overhead. High and low, blackberries hung in
multitudes, swelling to purple ripeness. Numberless the trailing and
climbing plants. Nancy's skirts rustled among the greenery; her cheeks
were touched, as if with a caress, by many a drooping branchlet; in
places, Tarrant had to hold the tangle above her while she stooped to
pass.

And from this they emerged into a small circular space, where the
cartway made a turn at right angles and disappeared behind thickets.
They were in the midst of a plantation; on every side trees closed about
them, with a low and irregular hedge to mark the borders of the grassy
road. Nancy's eyes fell at once upon a cluster of magnificent foxgloves,
growing upon a bank which rose to the foot of an old elm; beside
the foxgloves lay a short-hewn trunk, bedded in the ground, thickly
overgrown with mosses, lichens, and small fungi.

'Have I misled you?' said Tarrant, watching her face with frank
pleasure.

'No, indeed you haven't. This is very beautiful!'

'I discovered it last year, and spent hours here alone. I couldn't ask
you to come and see it then,' he added, laughing.

'It is delightful!'

'Here's your seat,--who knows how many years it has waited for you?'

She sat down upon the old trunk. About the roots of the elm above grew
masses of fern, and beneath it a rough bit of the bank was clothed
with pennywort, the green discs and yellowing fruity spires making
an exquisite patch of colour. In the shadow of bushes near at hand
hartstongue abounded, with fronds hanging to the length of an arm.

'Now,' said Tarrant, gaily, 'you shall have some blackberries. And he
went to gather them, returning in a few minutes with a large leaf
full. He saw that Nancy, meanwhile, had taken up the book from where he
dropped it to the ground; it lay open on her lap.

'Helmholtz! Away with him!'

'No; I have opened at something interesting.'

She spoke as though possession of the book were of vital importance to
her. Nevertheless, the fruit was accepted, and she drew off her gloves
to eat it. Tarrant seated himself on the ground, near her, and gradually
fell into a half-recumbent attitude.

'Won't you have any?' Nancy asked, without looking at him.

'One or two, if you will give me them.'

She chose a fine blackberry, and held it out. Tarrant let it fall into
his palm, and murmured, 'You have a beautiful hand.' When, a moment
after, he glanced at her, she seemed to be reading Helmholtz.

The calm of the golden afternoon could not have been more profound.
Birds twittered softly in the wood, and if a leaf rustled, it was
only at the touch of wings. Earth breathed its many perfumes upon the
slumberous air.

'You know,' said Tarrant, after a long pause, and speaking as though he
feared to break the hush, 'that Keats once stayed at Teignmouth.'

Nancy did not know it, but said 'Yes.' The name of Keats was familiar
to her, but of his life she knew hardly anything, of his poetry very
little. Her education had been chiefly concerned with names.

'Will you read me a paragraph of Helmholtz?' continued the other,
looking at her with a smile. 'Any paragraph, the one before you.'

She hesitated, but read at length, in an unsteady voice, something about
the Conservation of Force. It ended in a nervous laugh.

'Now I'll read something to you,' said Tarrant. And he began to repeat,
slowly, musically, lines of verse which his companion had never heard:

'_O what can ail thee, Knight-at-arms, Alone and palely loitering? The
sedge has wither'd from the lake, And no birds sing_.'

He went through the poem; Nancy the while did not stir. It was as
though he murmured melody for his own pleasure, rather than recited to
a listener; but no word was inaudible. Nancy knew that his eyes rested
upon her; she wished to smile, yet could not. And when he ceased, the
silence held her motionless.

'Isn't it better?' said Tarrant, drawing slightly nearer to her.

'Of course it is.'

'I used to know thousands of verses by heart.'

'Did you ever write any?'

'Half-a-dozen epics or so, when I was about seventeen. Yet, I don't come
of a poetical family. My father--'

He stopped abruptly, looked into Nancy's face with a smile, and said in
a tone of playfulness:

'Do you remember asking me whether I had anything to do with--'

Nancy, flushing over all her features, exclaimed, 'Don't! please don't!
I'm ashamed of myself!'

'I didn't like it. But we know each other better now. You were quite
right. That was how my grandfather made his money. My father, I believe,
got through most of it, and gave no particular thought to me. His
mother--the old lady whom you know--had plenty of her own--to be mine,
she tells me, some day. Do you wish to be forgiven for hurting my
pride?' he added.

'I don't know what made me say such a thing--'

She faltered the words; she felt her will subdued. Tarrant reached a
hand, and took one of hers, and kissed it; then allowed her to draw it
away.

'Now will you give me another blackberry?'

The girl was trembling; a light shone in her eyes. She offered the leaf
with fruit in it; Tarrant, whilst choosing, touched the blue veins of
her wrist with his lips.

'What are you going to do?' she asked presently. 'I mean, what do you
aim at in life?'

'Enjoyment. Why should I trouble about anything else. I should be
content if life were all like this: to look at a beautiful face, and
listen to a voice that charms me, and touch a hand that makes me thrill
with such pleasure as I never knew.'

'It's waste of time.'

'Oh, never time was spent so well! Look at me again like that--with the
eyes half-closed, and the lips half-mocking. Oh, the exquisite lips! If
I might--if I might--'

He did not stir from his posture of languid ease, but Nancy, with a
quick movement, drew a little away from him, then rose.

'It's time to go back,' she said absently.

'No, no; not yet. Let me look at you for a few minutes more!'

She began to walk slowly, head bent.

'Well then, to-morrow, or the day after. The place will be just as
beautiful, and you even more. The sea-air makes you lovelier from day to
day.'

Nancy looked back for an instant. Tarrant followed, and in the deep
leafy way he again helped her to pass the briers. But their hands never
touched, and the silence was unbroken until they had issued into the
open lane.



CHAPTER 6



The lodgings were taken for three weeks, and more than half the time had
now elapsed.

Jessica, who declared herself quite well and strong again, though her
face did not bear out the assertion, was beginning to talk of matters
examinational once more. Notwithstanding protests, she brought forth
from their hiding-place sundry arid little manuals and black-covered
notebooks; her thoughts were divided between algebraic formulae and
Nancy's relations with Lionel Tarrant. Perhaps because no secret was
confided to her, she affected more appetite for the arid little books
than she really felt. Nancy would neither speak of examinations, nor
give ear when they were talked about; she, whether consciously or not,
was making haste to graduate in quite another school.

On the morning after her long walk with Tarrant, she woke before
sunrise, and before seven o'clock had left the house. A high wind and
hurrying clouds made the weather prospects uncertain. She strayed
about the Den, never losing sight for more than a minute or two of the
sea-fronting house where Tarrant lived. But no familiar form approached
her, and she had to return to breakfast unrewarded for early rising.

Through the day she was restless and silent, kept alone as much as
possible, and wore a look which, as the hours went on, darkened from
anxiety to ill-humour. She went to bed much earlier than usual.

At eleven next morning, having lingered behind her friends, she found
Tarrant in conversation with Mrs. Morgan and Jessica on the pier. His
greeting astonished her; it had precisely the gracious formality of a
year ago; a word or two about the weather, and he resumed his talk
with Miss. Morgan--its subject, the educational value of the classics.
Obliged to listen, Nancy suffered an anguish of resentful passion. For
a quarter of an hour she kept silence, then saw the young man take leave
and saunter away with that air which, in satire, she had formerly styled
majestic.

And then passed three whole days, during which Lionel was not seen.

The evening of the fourth, between eight and nine o'clock, found
Nancy at the door of the house which her thoughts had a thousand times
visited. A servant, in reply to inquiry, told her that Mr Tarrant was in
London; he would probably return to-morrow.

She walked idly away--and, at less than a hundred yards' distance,
met Tarrant himself. His costume showed that he had just come from the
railway station. Nancy would gladly have walked straight past him, but
the tone in which he addressed her was a new surprise, and she stood
in helpless confusion. He had been to London--called away on sudden
business.

'I thought of writing--nay, I did write, but after all didn't post the
letter. For a very simple reason--I couldn't remember your address.'

And he laughed so naturally, that the captive walked on by his side,
unresisting. Their conversation lasted only a few minutes, then Nancy
resolutely bade him good-night, no appointment made for the morrow.

A day of showers, then a day of excessive heat. They saw each other
several times, but nothing of moment passed. The morning after they met
before breakfast.

'To-morrow is our last day,' said Nancy.

'Yes, Mrs. Morgan told me.' Nancy herself had never spoken of departure.
'This afternoon we'll go up the hill again.'

'I don't think I shall care to walk so far. Look at the mist; it's going
to be dreadfully hot again.'

Tarrant was in a mood of careless gaiety; his companion appeared to
struggle against listlessness, and her cheek had lost its wonted colour.

'You have tea at four or five, I suppose. Let us go after that, when the
heat of the day is over.'

To this, after various objections, Nancy consented. Through the hours
of glaring sunshine she stayed at home, lying inert, by an open window.
Over the tea-cups she was amiable, but dreamy. When ready to go out, she
just looked into the sitting-room, where Jessica bent over books, and
said cheerfully:

'I may be a little late for dinner. On no account wait--I forbid it!'

And so, without listening to the answer, she hurried away.

In the upward climbing lanes, no breeze yet tempered the still air; the
sky of misted sapphire showed not a cloud from verge to verge. Tarrant,
as if to make up for his companion's silence, talked ceaselessly, and
always in light vein. Sunshine, he said, was indispensable to his life;
he never passed the winter in London; if he were the poorest of mortals,
he would, at all events, beg his bread in a sunny clime.

'Are you going to the Bahamas this winter?' Nancy asked, mentioning the
matter for the first time since she heard of it at Champion Hill.

'I don't know. Everything is uncertain.'

And he put the question aside as if it were of no importance.

They passed the old gate, and breathed with relief in the never-broken
shadow of tangled foliage. Whilst pushing a bramble aside, Tarrant let
his free arm fall lightly on Nancy's waist. At once she sprang forward,
but without appearing to notice what had happened.

'Stay--did you ever see such ivy as this?'

It was a mass of large, lustrous leaves, concealing a rotten trunk.
Whilst Nancy looked on, Tarrant pulled at a long stem, and tried to
break it away.

'I must cut it.'

'Why?'

'You shall see.'

He wove three stems into a wreath.

'There now, take off your hat, and let me crown you. Have I made it too
large for the little head?'

Nancy, after a moment's reluctance, unfastened her hat, and stood
bareheaded, blushing and laughing.

'You do your hair in the right way--the Greek way. A diadem on the
top--the only way when the hair and the head are beautiful. It leaves
the outline free--the exquisite curve that unites neck and head. Now the
ivy wreath; and how will you look?'

She wore a dress of thin, creamy material, which, whilst seeming to
cumber her as little as garments could, yet fitted closely enough to
declare the healthy beauty of her form. The dark green garland, for
which she bent a little, became her admirably.

'I pictured it in my letter,' said Tarrant, 'the letter you never got.'

'Where is it?'

'Oh, I burnt it.'

'Tell me what was in it.'

'All sorts of things--a long letter.'

'I think that's all nonsense about forgetting my address.'

'Mere truth. In fact, I never knew it.'

'Be so good as to tell me,' she spoke as she walked on before him, 'what
you meant by your behaviour that morning before you went to London.'

'But how did I behave?'

'Very strangely.'

Tarrant affected not to understand; but, when she again turned, Nancy
saw a mischievous smile on his face.

'A bit of nonsense.--Shall I tell you?' He stepped near, and suddenly
caught both her hands,--one of them was trailing her sunshade. 'Forgive
me in advance--will you?'

'I don't know about that.' And she tried, though faintly, to get free.

'But I will make you--now, refuse!'

His lips had just touched hers, just touched and no more. Rosy red, she
trembled before him with drooping eyelids.

'It meant nothing at all, really,' he pursued, his voice at its softest.
'A sham trial--to see whether I was hopelessly conquered or not. Of
course I was.'

Nancy shook her head.

'You dare to doubt it?--I understand now what the old poet meant, when
he talked of bees seeking honey on his lady's lips. That fancy isn't so
artificial as it seemed.'

'That's all very pretty'--she spoke between quick breaths, and tried to
laugh--'but you have thrown my hat on the ground. Give it me, and take
the ivy for yourself.'

'I am no Bacchus.' He tossed the wreath aside. 'Take the hat; I like you
in it just as well.--You shall have a girdle of woodbine, instead.'

'I don't believe your explanation,' said Nancy.

'Not believe me?'

With feigned indignation, he moved to capture her again; but Nancy
escaped. Her hat in her hand, she darted forward. A minute's run brought
her into the open space, and there, with an exclamation of surprise, she
stopped. Tarrant, but a step or two behind her, saw at almost the same
moment the spectacle which had arrested her flight. Before them stood
two little donkeys munching eagerly at a crop of rosy-headed thistles.
They--the human beings--looked at each other; Tarrant burst into
extravagant laughter, and Nancy joined him. Neither's mirth was
spontaneous; Nancy's had a note of nervous tension, a ring of something
like recklessness.

'Where can they come from?' she asked.

'They must have strayed a long way. I haven't seen any farm or
cottage.--But perhaps some one is with them. Wait, I'll go on a little,
and see if some boy is hanging about.'

He turned the sharp corner, and disappeared. For two or three minutes
Nancy stood alone, watching the patient little grey beasts, whose
pendent ears, with many a turn and twitch, expressed their joy in the
feast of thistles. She watched them in seeming only; her eyes beheld
nothing.

A voice sounded from behind her--'Nancy!' Startled, she saw Tarrant
standing high up, in a gap of the hedge, on the bank which bordered the
wood.

'How did you get there?'

'Went round.' He showed the direction with his hand. 'I can see no one,
but somebody may come. It's wonderful here, among the trees. Come over.'

'How can I?--We will drive the donkeys away.'

'No; it's much better here; a wild wood, full of wonderful things. The
bank isn't too steep. Give me your hand, and you can step up easily,
just at this place.'

She drew near.

'Your sunshade first.'

'Oh, it's too much trouble,' she said languidly, all but plaintively.
'I'd rather be here.'

'Obey!--Your sunshade--'

She gave it.

'Now, your hand.'

He was kneeling on the top of the bank. With very little exertion,
Nancy found herself beside him. Then he at once leapt down among the
brushwood, a descent of some three feet.

'We shall be trespassing,' said Nancy.

'What do I care? Now, jump!'

'As if you could catch me!' Again she uttered her nervous laugh. 'I am
heavy.'

'Obey! Jump!' he cried impatiently, his eyes afire.

She knelt, seated herself, dropped forward. Tarrant caught her in his
arms.

'You heavy! a feather weight! Why, I can carry you; I could run with
you.'

And he did carry her through the brushwood, away into the shadow of the
trees.

At dinner-time, Mrs. Morgan and her daughter were alone. They agreed to
wait a quarter of an hour, and sat silent, pretending each to be engaged
with a book. At length their eyes met.

'What does it mean, Jessica?' asked the mother timidly.

'I'm sure I don't know. It doesn't concern us. She didn't mean to be
back, by what she said.'

'But--isn't it rather--?'

'Oh, Nancy is all right. I suppose she'll have something to tell you,
to-night or to-morrow. We must have dinner; I'm hungry.'

'So am I, dear.--Oh, I'm quite afraid to think of the appetites we're
taking back. Poor Milly will be terrified.'

Eight o'clock, nine o'clock. The two conversed in subdued voices; Mrs.
Morgan was anxious, all but distressed. Half-past nine. 'What _can_ it
mean, Jessica? I can't help feeling a responsibility. After all,
Nancy is quite a young girl; and I've sometimes thought she might be
steadier.'

'Hush! That was a knock.'

They waited. In a minute or two the door was opened a few inches, and a
voice called 'Jessica!'

She responded. Nancy was standing in the gloom.

'Come into my room,' she said curtly.

Arrived there, she did not strike a light. She closed the door, and took
hold of her friend's arm.

'We can't go back the day after to-morrow, Jessica. We must wait a day
longer, till the afternoon of Friday.'

'Why? What's the matter, Nancy?'

'Nothing serious. Don't be frightened, I'm tired, and I shall go to
bed.'

'But why must we wait?'

'Listen: will you promise me faithfully--as friend to friend, faith
fully--not to tell the reason even to your mother?'

'I will, faithfully.'

'Then, it's this. On Friday morning I shall be married to Mr Tarrant.'

'Gracious!'

'I may tell you more, before then; but perhaps not. We shall be married
by licence, and it needs one day between getting the licence and the
marriage. You may tell your mother, if you like, that I want to stay
longer on _his_ account. I don't care; of course she suspects something.
But not a syllable to hint at the truth. I have been your best friend
for a long time, and I trust you.'

