the next time you come. Do you know, I've been thinking that it might
be well if you parted your hair in the middle. I don't care for it as a
rule; but in your case, with your soft, beautiful hair, I think it would
look well. Shall we try? Wait a minute; I'll run for a comb.'

'But suppose some one came--'

'Nobody will come, my dear boy. Hardly any one knows I'm here. I like to
get away from people now and then; that's why I've taken refuge in this
cock-loft.'

She disappeared, and came back with a comb of tortoise-shell.

'Sit down there. Oh, what hair it is, to be sure! Almost as fine as my
own. I think you'll have a delicious moustache.'

Her personal appearance was quite in keeping with this vivacity. Rather
short, and inclining--but as yet only inclining--to rotundity of figure,
with a peculiarly soft and clear complexion, Mrs. Damerel made a gallant
battle against the hostile years. Her bright eye, her moist lips, the
admirable smoothness of brow and cheek and throat, bore witness to
sound health; as did the rows of teeth, incontestably her own, which she
exhibited in her frequent mirth. A handsome woman still, though not
of the type that commands a reverent admiration. Her frivolity did not
exclude a suggestion of shrewdness, nor yet of capacity for emotion, but
it was difficult to imagine wise or elevated thought behind that narrow
brow. She was elaborately dressed, with only the most fashionable
symbols of widowhood; rings adorned her podgy little hand, and
a bracelet her white wrist. Refinement she possessed only in the
society-journal sense, but her intonation was that of the idle class,
and her grammar did not limp.

'There--let me look. Oh, I think that's an improvement--more
_distingue_. And now tell me the news. How is your father?'

'Very bad, I'm afraid,' said Horace, when he had regarded himself in a
mirror with something of doubtfulness. 'Nancy says that she's afraid he
won't get well.'

'Oh, you don't say that! Oh, how very sad! But let us hope. I can't
think it's so bad as that.'

Horace sat in thought. Mrs. Damerel, her bright eyes subduing their
gaiety to a keen reflectiveness, put several questions regarding the
invalid, then for a moment meditated.

'Well, we must hope for the best. Let me know to-morrow how he gets
on--be sure you let me know. And if anything _should_ happen--oh, but
that's too sad; we won't talk about it.'

Again she meditated, tapping the floor, and, as it seemed, trying not to
smile.

'Don't be downcast, my dear boy. Never meet sorrow half-way--if you knew
how useful I have found it to remember that maxim. I have gone through
sad, sad things--ah! But now tell me of your own affairs. Have you seen
_la petite_?'

'I just saw her the other evening,' he answered uneasily.

'Just? What does that mean, I wonder? Now you don't look anything like
so well as when you were at Scarborough. You're worrying; yes, I know
you are. It's your nervous constitution, my poor boy. So you just saw
her? No more imprudences?'

She examined his face attentively, her lips set with tolerable firmness.

'It's a very difficult position, you know,' said Horace, wriggling in
his chair. 'I can't get out of it all at once. And the truth is, I'm not
sure that I wish to.'

Mrs. Damerel drew her eyebrows together, and gave a loud tap on the
floor.

'Oh, that's weak--that's very weak! After promising me! Now listen;
listen seriously.' She raised a finger. 'If it goes on, I have
nothing--more--whatever to do with you. It would distress me very, very
much; but I can't interest myself in a young man who makes love to a
girl so very far beneath him. Be led by me, Horace, and your future
will be brilliant. Prefer this young lady of Camberwell, and lose
everything.'

Horace leaned forward and drooped his head.

'I don't think you form anything like a right idea of her,' he said.

The other moved impatiently.

'My dear boy, I know her as well as if I'd lived with her for years. Oh,
how silly you are! But then you are so young, so very young.'

With the vexation on her face there blended, as she looked at him, a
tenderness unmistakably genuine.

'Now, I'll tell you what. I have really no objection to make Fanny's
acquaintance. Suppose, after all, you bring her to see me one of these
days. Not just yet. You must wait till I am in the mood for it. But
before very long.'

Horace looked up with pleasure and gratitude.

'Now, that's really kind of you!'

'Really? And all the rest is only pretended kindness? Silly boy! Some
day you will know better. Now, think, Horace; suppose you were so
unhappy as to lose your father. Could you, as soon as he was gone, do
something that you know would have pained him deeply?'

The pathetic note was a little strained; putting her head aside, Mrs.
Damerel looked rather like a sentimental picture in an advertisement.
Horace did not reply.

'You surely wouldn't,' pursued the lady, with emphasis, watching him
closely; 'you surely wouldn't and couldn't marry this girl as soon as
your poor father was in his grave?'

'Oh, of course not.'

Mrs. Damerel seemed relieved, but pursued her questioning.

'You couldn't think of marrying for at least half a year?'

'Fanny wouldn't wish it.'

'No, of course not,--well now, I think I must make her acquaintance.
But how weak you are, Horace! Oh, those nerves! All finely, delicately
organised people, like you, make such blunders in life. Your sense of
honour is such a tyrant over you. Now, mind, I don't say for a moment
that Fanny isn't fond of you,--how could she help being, my dear boy?
But I do insist that she will be very much happier if you let her marry
some one of her own class. You, Horace, belong to a social sphere so
far, far above her. If I could only impress that upon your modesty.
You are made to associate with people of the highest refinement. How
deplorable to think that a place in society is waiting for you, and you
keep longing for Camberwell!'

The listener's face wavered between pleasure in such flattery and the
impulse of resistance.

'Remember, Horace, if anything _should_ happen at home, you are your own
master. I could introduce you freely to people of wealth and fashion. Of
course you could give up the office at once. I shall be taking a house
in the West-end, or a flat, at all events. I shall entertain a good
deal--and think of your opportunities! My dear boy, I assure you that,
with personal advantages such as yours, you might end by marrying an
heiress. Nothing more probable! And you can talk of such a girl as Fanny
French--for shame!

'I mustn't propose any gaieties just now,' she said, when they had been
together for an hour. 'And I shall wait so anxiously for news of your
father. If anything _did_ happen, what would your sister do, I wonder?'

'I'm sure I don't know--except that she'd get away from Camberwell.
Nancy hates it.'

'Who knows? I may be able to be of use to her. But, you say she is such
a grave and learned young lady? I am afraid we should bore each other.'

To this, Horace could venture only an uncertain reply. He had not much
hope of mutual understanding between his sister and Mrs. Damerel.

At half-past five he was home again, and there followed a cheerless
evening. Nancy was in her own room until nine o'clock. She came down
for supper, but had no appetite; her eyes showed redness from weeping;
Horace could say nothing for her comfort. After the meal, they went up
together to the drawing-room, and sat unoccupied.

'If we lose father,' said Nancy, in a dull voice very unlike her
ordinary tones, 'we shall have not a single relative left, that is
anything to us.'

Her brother kept silence.

'Has Mrs. Damerel,' she continued, 'ever said anything to you about
mother's family?'

After hesitation, Horace answered, 'Yes,' and his countenance showed
that the affirmative had special meaning. Nancy waited with an inquiring
look.

'I haven't told you,' he added, 'because--we have had other things to
think about. But Mrs. Damerel is mother's sister, our aunt.'

'How long have you known that?'

'She told me at Scarborough.'

'But why didn't she tell you so at first?'

'That's what I can't understand. She says she was afraid I might mention
it; but I don't believe that's the real reason.'

Nancy's questioning elicited all that was to be learnt from her brother,
little more than she had heard already; the same story of a disagreement
between Mrs. Damerel and their father, of long absences from England,
and a revival of interest in her relatives, following upon Mrs.
Damerel's widowhood.

'She would be glad to see you, if you liked. But I doubt whether you
would get on very well.'

'Why?'

'She doesn't care about the same things that you do. She's a woman of
society, you know.'

'But if she's mother's sister. Yes, I should like to know her.' Nancy
spoke with increasing earnestness. 'It makes everything quite different.
I must see her.'

'Well, as I said, she's quite willing. But you remember that I'm
supposed not to have spoken about her at all. I should have to get her
to send you a message, or something of that kind. Of course, we have
often talked about you.'

'I can't form an idea of her,' said Nancy impatiently. 'Is she good? Is
she really kind? Couldn't you get her portrait to show me?'

'I should be afraid to ask, unless she had given me leave to speak to
you.'

'She really lives in good society?'

'Haven't I told you the sort of people she knows? She must be very well
off; there can't be a doubt of it.'

I don't care so much about that,' said Nancy in a brooding voice. 'It's
herself,--whether she's kind and good and wishes well to us.

The next day there was no change in Mr. Lord's condition; a deep silence
possessed the house. In the afternoon Nancy went to pass an hour with
Jessica Morgan; on her return she met Samuel Barmby, who was just
leaving after a visit to the sick man. Samuel bore himself with
portentous gravity, but spoke only a few commonplaces, affecting hope;
he bestowed upon Nancy's hand a fervent pressure, and strode away with
the air of an undertaker who had called on business.

Two more days of deepening gloom, then a night through which Nancy sat
with Mary Woodruff by her father's bed. Mr. Lord was unconscious, but
from time to time a syllable or a phrase fell from his lips, meaningless
to the watchers. At dawn, Nancy went to her chamber, pallid, exhausted.
Mary, whose strength seemed proof against fatigue, moved about the room,
preparing for a new day; every few minutes she stood with eyes fixed
on the dying face, and the tears she had restrained in Nancy's presence
flowed silently.

When the sun made a golden glimmer upon the wall, Mary withdrew, and was
absent for a quarter of an hour. On returning, she bent at once over the
bed; her eyes were met by a grave, wondering look.

'Do you know me?' she whispered.

The lips moved; she bent lower, but could distinguish no word. He was
speaking; the murmur continued; but she gathered no sense.

'You can trust me, I will do all I can.'

He seemed to understand her, and smiled. As the smile faded away,
passing into an austere calm, Mary pressed her lips upon his forehead.



CHAPTER 5



After breakfast, and before Arthur Peachey's departure for business,
there had been a scene of violent quarrel between him and his wife. It
took place in the bed-room, where, as usual save on Sunday morning, Ada
consumed her strong tea and heavily buttered toast; the state of her
health--she had frequent ailments, more or less genuine, such as afflict
the indolent and brainless type of woman--made it necessary for her to
repose till a late hour. Peachey did not often lose self-control, though
sorely tried; the one occasion that unchained his wrath was when Ada's
heedlessness or ill-temper affected the well-being of his child. This
morning it had been announced to him that the nurse-girl, Emma, could no
longer be tolerated; she was making herself offensive to her mistress,
had spoken insolently, disobeyed orders, and worst of all, defended
herself by alleging orders from Mr. Peachey. Hence the outbreak of
strife, signalled by furious shrill voices, audible to Beatrice and
Fanny as they sat in the room beneath.

Ada came down at half-past ten, and found Beatrice writing letters. She
announced what any who did not know her would have taken for a final
resolve.

'I'm going--I won't put up with that beast any longer. I shall go and
live at Brighton.'

Her sister paid not the slightest heed; she was intent upon a business
letter of much moment.

'Do you hear what I say? I'm going by the first train this afternoon.'

'All right,' remarked Beatrice placidly. 'Don't interrupt me just now.

The result of this was fury directed against Beatrice, who found herself
accused of every domestic vice compatible with her position. She was a
sordid creature, living at other people's expense,--a selfish, scheming,
envious wretch--

'If I were your husband,' remarked the other without looking up, 'I
should long since have turned you into the street--if I hadn't broken
your neck first.'

Exercise in quarrel only made Ada's voice the clearer and more shrill.
It rose now to the highest points of a not inconsiderable compass. But
Beatrice continued to write, and by resolute silence put a limit to her
sister's railing. A pause had just come about, when the door was thrown
open, and in rushed Fanny, hatted and gloved from a walk.

'He's dead!' she said excitedly. 'He's dead!'

Beatrice turned with a look of interest. 'Who? Mr. Lord?'

'Yes. The blinds are all down. He must have died in the night.'

Her cheeks glowed and her eyes sparkled, as though she had brought the
most exhilarating news.

'What do I care?' said Mrs. Peachey, to whom her sister had addressed
the last remark.

'Just as much as I care about your affairs, no doubt,' returned Fanny,
with genial frankness.

'Don't be in too great a hurry,' remarked Beatrice, who showed the
calculating wrinkle at the corner of her eye. 'Because he's dead, that
doesn't say that your masher comes in for money.'

'Who'll get it, then?'

'There may be nothing worth speaking of to get, for all we know.'

Beatrice had not as yet gained Fanny's co-operation in the commercial
scheme now being elaborated; though of far more amiable nature than Mrs.
Peachey, she heartily hoped that the girl might be disappointed in her
expectations from Mr. Lord's will. An hour later, she walked along Grove
Lane, and saw for herself that Fanny's announcement was accurate; the
close-drawn blinds could mean but one thing.

To-day there was little likelihood of learning particulars, but on the
morrow Fanny might perchance hear something from Horace Lord. However,
the evening brought a note, hand-delivered by some stranger. Horace
wrote only a line or two, informing Fanny that his father had died about
eight o'clock that morning, and adding: 'Please be at home to-morrow at
twelve.'

At twelve next day Fanny received her lover alone in the drawing-room.
He entered with the exaggerated solemnity of a very young man who
knows for the first time a grave bereavement, and feels the momentary
importance it confers upon him. Fanny, trying to regard him without a
smile, grimaced; decorous behaviour was at all times impossible to her,
for she neither understood its nature nor felt its obligation. In a few
minutes she smiled unrestrainedly, and spoke the things that rose to her
lips.

'I've been keeping a secret from you,' said Horace, in the low voice
which had to express his sorrow,--for he could not preserve a gloomy
countenance with Fanny before him. 'But I can tell you now.'

'A secret? And what business had you to keep secrets from me?'

'It's about Mrs. Damerel. When I was at the seaside she told me who she
really is. She's my aunt--my mother's sister. Queer, isn't it? Of course
that makes everything different. And she's going to ask you to come and
see her. It'll have to be put off a little--now; but not very long, I
dare say, as she's a relative. You'll have to do your best to please
her.'

'I'm sure I shan't put myself out of the way. People must take me as
they find me.'

'Now don't talk like that, Fanny. It isn't very kind--just now. I
thought you'd be different to-day.'

'All right.--Have you anything else to tell me?'

Horace understood her significant glance, and shook his head.

'I'll let you know everything as soon as I know myself.'

Having learnt the day and hour of Mr. Lord's funeral, Ada and Fanny
made a point of walking out to get a glimpse of it. The procession of
vehicles in Grove Lane excited their contempt, so far was it from the
splendour they had anticipated.

'There you are!' said Ada; 'I shouldn't wonder if it's going to be a
jolly good take in for you, after all. If he'd died worth much, they
wouldn't have buried him like that.'

Fanny's heart sank. She could conceive no other explanation of a simple
burial save lack of means, or resentment in the survivors at the
disposition made of his property by the deceased. When, on the morrow,
Horace told her that his father had strictly charged Mr Barmby to have
him buried in the simplest mode compatible with decency, she put it down
to the old man's excessive meanness.

On this occasion she learnt the contents of Mr. Lord's will, and having
learnt them, got rid of Horace as soon as possible that she might
astonish her sisters with the report.

In the afternoon of that day, Beatrice had an appointment with Luckworth
Crewe. She was to meet him at the office he had just taken in
Farringdon Street, whence they would repair to a solicitor's in the same
neighbourhood, for the discussion of legal business connected with Miss.
French's enterprise. She climbed the staircase of a big building, and
was directed to the right door by the sound of Crewe's voice, loudly and
jocularly discoursing. He stood with two men in the open doorway, and at
the sight of Beatrice waved a hand to her.

'Take your hook, you fellows; I have an engagement.' The men, glancing
at Miss. French facetiously, went their way. 'How do, old chum? It's all
in a mess yet; hold your skirts together. Come along this way.'

Through glue-pots and shavings and an overpowering smell of paint,
Beatrice followed to inspect the premises, which consisted of three
rooms; one, very much the smallest, about ten feet square. Three
workmen were busy, and one, fitting up shelves, whistled a melody with
ear-piercing shrillness.

'Stop that damned noise!' shouted Crewe. 'I've told you once already.
Try it on again, my lad, and I'll drop you down the well of the
staircase--you've too much breath, you have.'

The other workmen laughed. It was evident that Crewe had made friends
with them all.

'Won't be bad, when we get the decks cleared,' he remarked to Beatrice.
'Plenty of room to make twenty thousand a year or so.'

He checked himself, and asked in a subdued voice, 'Seen anything of the
Lords?'

Beatrice nodded with a smile. 'And heard about the will. Have you?'

'No, I haven't. Come into this little room.'

He closed the door behind them, and looked at his companion with
curiosity, but without show of eagerness.

'Well, it's a joke,' said Miss. French.

'Is it? How?'

'Fanny's that mad about it! She'd got it into her silly noddle that
Horace Lord would drop in for a fortune at once. As it is, he gets
nothing at all for two years, except what the Barmbys choose to
give him. And if he marries before he's four-and-twenty, he loses
everything--every cent!'

Crewe whistled a bar of a street-melody, then burst into laughter.

'That's how the old joker has done them, is it? Quite right too. The
lad doesn't know his own mind yet. Let Fanny wait if she really wants
him--and if she can keep hold of him. But what are the figures?'

'Nothing startling. Of course I don't know all the ins and outs of it,
but Horace Lord will get seven thousand pounds, and a sixth share in the
piano business. Old Barmby and his son are trustees. They may let Horace
have just what they think fit during the next two years. If he wants
money to go into business with, they may advance what they like. But
for two years he's simply in their hands, to be looked after. And if he
marries--pop goes the weasel!'

'And Miss. Lord?' asked Crewe carelessly.

Beatrice pointed a finger at him.

'You want to know badly, don't you? Well, it's pretty much the same
as the other. To begin with, if she marries before the age of
six-and-twenty, she gets nothing whatever. If she doesn't marry, there's
two hundred a year to live on and to keep up the house.--Oh, I was
forgetting; she must not only keep single to twenty-six, but continue to
live where she does now, with that old servant of theirs for companion.
At six-and-twenty she takes the same as her brother, about seven
thousand, and a sixth share in Lord and Barmby.'

Again Crewe whistled.

'That's about three years still to live in Grove Lane,' he said
thoughtfully. 'Well, the old joker has pinned them, and no mistake. I
thought he had more to leave.'

'Of course you did,' remarked Beatrice significantly.

'Look here, old fellow, don't talk to me like that,' he replied
good-humouredly, but with a reproof not to be mistaken. 'I thought
nothing about it in the way that _you_ mean. But it isn't much, after
living as he has done. I suppose you don't know how the money lies?'

'I have it all from Fanny, and it's a wonder she remembered as much as
she did.'

'Oh, Fanny's pretty smart in L. s. d. But did she say what becomes of
the money if either of them break the terms?'

'Goes to a girl's orphanage, somewhere in the old man's country. But
there's more than I've accounted for yet. Young Barmby's sisters get
legacies--a hundred and fifty apiece. And, last of all, the old servant
has an annuity of two hundred. He made her a sort of housekeeper not
long ago, H. L. says; thought no end of her.'

'Don't know anything about her,' said Crewe absently. 'I should like to
know the business details. What arrangement was made, I wonder, when he
took Barmby into partnership?'

'I shouldn't be surprised if he simply gave him a share. Old Barmby and
Lord were great chums. Then, you see, Samuel Barmby has a third of his
profits to pay over, eventually.'

Beatrice went on to speak of the mysterious Mrs. Damerel, concerning
whom she had heard from Fanny. The man of business gave particular ear
to this story, and asked many questions. Of a sudden, as if dismissing
matters which hardly concerned him, he said mirthfully:

'You've heard about the row at Lillie Bridge yesterday?'

'I saw something about it in the paper.'

'Well, I was there. Pure chance; haven't been at that kind of place
for a year and more. It was a match for the Sprint Championship and a
hundred pounds. Timed for six o'clock, but at a quarter past the
chaps hadn't come forward. I heard men talking, and guessed there was
something wrong; they thought it a put-up job. When it got round that
there'd be no race, the excitement broke out, and then--I'd have given
something for you to see it! First of all there was a rush for the
gate-money; a shilling a piece, you know, we'd all paid. There were a
whole lot of North-of-England chaps, fellow countrymen of mine, and I
heard some of them begin to send up a roar that sounded dangerous. I
was tumbling along with the crowd, quite ready for a scrimmage--I rather
enjoy a fight now and then,--and all at once some chap sang out just
in front, 'Let's burst up the blooming show!'--only he used a stronger
word. And a lot of us yelled hooray, and to it we went. I don't mean I
had a hand in the pillaging and smashing,--it wouldn't have done for
a man just starting in business to be up at the police-court,--but I
looked on and laughed--laughed till I could hardly stand! They set
to work on the refreshment place. It was a scene if you like! Fellows
knocking off the heads of bottles, and drinking all they could, then
pouring the rest on the ground. Glasses and decanters flying right and
left,--sandwiches and buns, and I don't know what, pelting about. They
splintered all the small wood they could lay their hands on, and set
fire to it, and before you could say Jack Robinson the whole place was
blazing. The bobbies got it pretty warm--bottles and stones and logs of
wood; I saw one poor chap with the side of his face cut clean open. It
does one good, a real stirring-up like that; I feel better to-day than
for the last month. And the swearing that went on! It's a long time
since I heard such downright, hearty, solid swearing. There was one chap
I kept near, and he swore for a full hour without stopping, except when
he had a bottle at his mouth; he only stopped when he was speechless
with liquor.'

'I wish I'd been there,' said Miss. French gaily. 'It must have been no
end of fun.'

'A right down good spree. And it wasn't over till about eight o'clock.
I stayed till the police had cleared the grounds, and then came home,
laughing all the way. It did me good, I tell you!'

'Well, shall we go and see the lawyer?' suggested Beatrice.

'Right you are.--Have a drink first? Nice quiet place round in Fleet
Street--glass of wine. No? As you please, old chum.--Think this shop
'll do, don't you? You must come round when it's finished. But I daresay
you'll be here many a time--on biz.'

'Oh, I daresay.'

And as they went down the stairs, Crewe laughed again at his
recollections of yesterday's sport.



CHAPTER 6



Gusts of an October evening swept about the square of the old Inn,
and made rushes at the windows; all the more cosy seemed it here in
Tarrant's room, where a big fire, fed into smokeless placidity,
purred and crackled. Pipe in mouth, Tarrant lay back in his big chair,
gracefully indolent as ever. Opposite him, lamp-light illuminating her
face on one side, and fire-gloom on the other, Nancy turned over an
illustrated volume, her husband's gift today. Many were the presents he
had bestowed upon her, costly some of them, all flattering the recipient
by a presumption of taste and intelligence.

She had been here since early in the afternoon, it was now near seven
o'clock.

Nancy looked at the pictures, but inattentively, her brows slightly
knitted, and her lips often on the point of speech that concerned some
other matter. Since the summer holiday she had grown a trifle thinner in
face; her beauty was no longer allied with perfect health; a heaviness
appeared on her eyelids. Of course she wore the garb of mourning,
and its effect was to emphasise the maturing change manifest in her
features.

For several minutes there had passed no word; but Tarrant's face,
no less than his companion's, signalled discussion in suspense. No
unfriendly discussion, yet one that excited emotional activity in both
of them. The young man, his pipe-hand falling to his knee, first broke
silence.

'I look at it in this way. We ought to regard ourselves as married
people living under exceptionally favourable circumstances. One has to
bear in mind the brutal fact that man and wife, as a rule, see a great
deal too much of each other--thence most of the ills of married life:
squabblings, discontents, small or great disgusts, leading often
enough to _altri guai_. People get to think themselves victims of
incompatibility, when they are merely suffering from a foolish
custom--the habit of being perpetually together. In fact, it's an
immoral custom. What does immorality mean but anything that tends
to kill love, to harden hearts? The common practice of man and wife
occupying the same room is monstrous, gross; it's astounding that
women of any sensitiveness endure it. In fact, their sensitiveness is
destroyed. Even an ordinary honeymoon generally ends in quarrel--as
it certainly ought to. You and I escape all that. Each of us lives a
separate life, with the result that we like each other better as time
goes on; I speak for myself, at all events. I look forward to our
meetings. I open the door to you with as fresh a feeling of pleasure
as when you came first. If we had been ceaselessly together day and
night--well, you know the result as well as I do.'

He spoke with indulgent gravity, in the tone of kindness to which his
voice was naturally attuned. And Nancy's reply, though it expressed a
stronger feeling, struck the same harmonious note.

'I can agree with all that. But it applies to people married in the
ordinary way. I was speaking of ourselves, placed as we are.'

'I don't pretend to like the concealment,' said Tarrant. 'For one thing,
there's a suggestion of dishonour about it. We've gone over all that--'

'Oh, I don't mean that for a moment. It isn't really dishonourable. My
father could never have objected to _you_ for my husband. He only wanted
to guard me--Mary says so, and he told her everything. He thought me a
silly, flighty girl, and was afraid I should be trapped for the sake of
my money. I wish--oh how I wish I had had the courage to tell him! He
would have seen you, and liked and trusted you--how could he help?'

'It might have been better--but who knows whether he would have seen me
with your eyes, Nancy?'

'Yes, yes. But I was going to say----'

She hesitated.

'Say on.'

'There are so many difficulties before us, dear.'

'Not if we continue to think of each other as we do now. Do you mean it
might be discovered?'

'Yes, through no fault of ours.'

She hesitated again.

'Quite sure you haven't told anybody?'

'No one.'

Tarrant had a doubt on this point. He strongly suspected that Jessica
Morgan knew the truth, but he shrank from pressing Nancy to an avowal of
repeated falsehood.

'Then it's very unlikely we should be found out. Who would dream of
tracking you here, for instance? And suppose we were seen together
in the street or in the country, who would suspect anything more than
love-making? and that is not forbidden you.'

'No. But--'

'But?'

'But suppose I--'

She rose, crossed to him, seated herself on his knee and put an arm
about his neck. Before she had spoken another word, Tarrant understood;
the smile on his face lost its spontaneity; a bitter taste seemed to
distort his lips.

'You think--you are afraid--'

He heard a monosyllable, and sat silent. This indeed had not entered
into his calculations; but why not? He could hardly say; he had ignored
the not unimportant detail, as it lurked among possibilities. Perhaps
had willingly ignored it, as introducing a complication oppressive
to his indolence, to his hodiernal philosophy. And now he arraigned
mother-nature, the very divinity whom hitherto he had called upon to
justify him. All at once he grew cold to Nancy. The lulled objections to
matrimony awoke in him again; again he felt that he had made a fool of
himself. Nancy was better than he had thought; he either loved her, or
felt something towards her, not easily distinguishable from love. His
inferior she remained, but not in the sense he had formerly attributed
to the word. Her mind and heart excelled the idle conception he had
formed of them. But Nancy was not his wife, as the world understands
that relation; merely his mistress, and as a mistress he found her
charming, lovable. What she now hinted at, would shatter the situation.
Tarrant thought not of the peril to her material prospects; on that
score he was indifferent, save in so far as Mr Lord's will helped to
maintain their mutual independence. But he feared for his liberty, in
the first place, and in the second, abhorred the change that must come
over Nancy herself. Nancy a mother--he repelled the image, as though it
degraded her.

Delicacy, however, constrained him to a disguise of these emotions. He
recognised the human sentiments that should have weighed with him; like
a man of cultivated intelligence, he admitted their force, their beauty.
None the less, a syllable on Nancy's lips had arrested the current of
his feelings, and made him wish again that he had been either more or
less a man of honour down at Teignmouth.

'And yet,' he said to himself, 'could I have resisted an appeal for
marriage _now_? That comes of being so confoundedly humane. It's a
marvel that I didn't find myself married to some sheer demirep long
ago.'

Nancy was speaking.

'Will it make you love me less?'

'I have always refused to prophesy about love,' he answered, with forced
playfulness.

'But you wouldn't--you wouldn't?'

'We should find ourselves in a very awkward position.'

'I know,' said Nancy hurriedly. 'I can't see what would be done. But you
seem colder to me all at once, Lionel. Surely it oughtn't to--to turn
you away from me. Perhaps I am mistaken.'

This referred to the alarming possibility, and Tarrant caught at hope.
Yes, she might be mistaken; they wouldn't talk about it; he shook it
away.

'Let me fill my pipe again. Yes, you can do it for me. That reminds me
of a story Harvey Munden tells. A man he knew, a doctor, got married,
and there was nothing his wife wouldn't do for him. As he sat with her
one evening, smoking, a patient called him into the consulting-room. He
had only just lighted a fresh pipe, and laid it down regretfully. 'I'll
keep it in for you,' said his wife. And she did so, with dainty and
fearful puffs, at long intervals. But the doctor was detained, and when
he came back--well, the poor wife had succumbed to her devotion. She
never kept in his pipe again.

Nancy tried to laugh. She was in her own chair again, and sat resting
her cheek upon her hand, gazing at the fire.

'How is it, Lionel, that no one ever knocks at your door when I'm here.'

'Oh, very simple. I sport the oak--as you know.'

'But don't you think some friend of yours might see a light in your
window, and come up?'

'If so, _il respecte la consigne_.'

'No, no; I don't like you when you begin to use French words. I think
it reminds me of once when you did it a long time ago,--and I thought
you--never mind.'

Tarrant laughed.

'Weren't they strange--those meetings of ours at Champion Hill? What did
you think me? Arrogant? Insolent? That is my tendency with strangers, I
admit.'

'But I was asking you a question,' said Nancy. 'You mean that no one
would knock, if he saw your outer door closed. But what would they
think?'

'No doubt--that I was working. I am supposed to be secretly engaged on
some immortal composition.'

Nancy pondered.

'I do hope no one that knows you will ever see me coming or going.'

'What could it matter? They wouldn't know who you were.'

'But to have such things thought. I should feel it just as if they knew
me. I believe I could never come again.'

'Why, what's the matter with you?' Tarrant asked. 'You have tears in
your eyes. You're not well to-day.' He checked himself on an unwelcome
thought, and proceeded more carelessly. 'Do you suppose for a moment
that any friend of mine is ass enough to think with condemnation of a
girl who should come to my rooms--whatever the circumstances? You must
get rid of that provincialism--let us call it Camberwellism.'

'They wouldn't think it any harm--even if--?'

'My dear girl, we have outgrown those ancestral prejudices.' Tarrant's
humour never quite deserted him, least of all when he echoed the talk
of his world; but his listener kept a grave face. 'We have nothing to do
with Mrs. Grundy's morals.'

'But you believe in a morality of some kind?' she pursued with
diffidence. 'You used the word "immoral" just now.'

Nancy felt no consciousness of the gulf that yawned between herself as
she spoke now and the old self which had claimed 'superiority.' Her mind
was so completely unsettled that she never tried to connect its present
state with its earlier phases. For the most part, her sensations and
her reflections were concerned with the crude elements of life; the
exceptional moments she spent in a world of vague joys and fears,
wherein thought, properly speaking, had no share. Before she could
outlive the shock of passion which seemed at once to destroy and to
re-create her, she was confronted with the second supreme crisis of
woman's existence,--its natural effects complicated with the trials of
her peculiar position. Tarrant's reception of her disclosure came as a
new disturbance--she felt bewildered and helpless.

He, preoccupied with the anxiety he affected to dismiss, had no
inclination to debate ethical problems. For a while he talked jestingly,
and at length fell into a mood of silence. Nancy did not stay much
longer; they parted without mention of the subject uppermost in their
thoughts.

They had no stated times of meeting. Tarrant sent an invitation whenever
it pleased him. When the next arrived, in about a week, Nancy made reply
that she did not feel well enough to leave home. It was the briefest
letter Tarrant had yet received from her, and the least affectionate. He
kept silence for a few days, and wrote again. This time Nancy responded
as usual, and came.

To the involuntary question in his eyes, hers answered unmistakably. For
the first few minutes they said very little to each other. Tarrant was
struggling with repulsions and solicitudes of which he felt more than
half ashamed; Nancy, reticent for many reasons, not the least of them a
resentful pride, which for the moment overcame her fondness, endeavoured
to speak of trivial things. They kept apart, and at length the
embarrassment of the situation held them both mute.

With a nervous movement, the young man pushed forward the chair on which
Nancy usually sat.

'I see that you don't look well.'

Nancy turned to the window. She had unbuttoned her jacket, and taken off
her gloves, but went no further in the process of preparing herself for
the ordinary stay of some hours.

'Did something in my letter displease you?' inquired her husband.

'You mean--because I didn't come? No; I really didn't feel well enough.'

Tarrant hesitated, but the softer feeling prevailed with him. He helped
to remove her jacket, seated her by the fire, and led her to talk.

'So there's no doubt of it?'

Her silence made answer.

'Then of course there's just as little doubt as to what we must do.'

His voice had not a convincing sincerity; he waited for the reply.

'You mean that we can't keep the secret?'

'How is it possible?'

'But you are vexed about it. You don't speak to me as you used to. I
don't think you ever will again.'

'It will make no change in _me_,' said Tarrant, with resolute good
humour. 'All I want to be sure of is that you are quite prepared for the
change in your prospects.'

'Are _you_, dear?'

Her tone and look deprived the inquiry of unpleasant implication. He
answered her with a laugh.

'You know exactly how I regard it. In one way I should feel relief. Of
course I don't like the thought that I shall have caused you to suffer
such a loss.'

'I should never have that thought. But are you quite sure about the
result to yourself? You remember saying that you couldn't be certain
how--'

'How it will be taken at Champion Hill? I was going to tell you the
latest report from there. It is very doubtful whether I should ever have
to break the news.'

They did not look at each other.

'Everything, in that quarter, must be long since settled. Pray remember
that I have no vast expectations. Quite certainly, it won't be a large
fortune; very likely not more than your own. But enough to live on, no
doubt. I know the value of money--no man better. It would be pleasant
enough to play with thousands a year. But I don't grumble so long as I
have a competency.'

Nancy meditated, and sighed.

'Oh, it's a pity. Father never meant me to be penniless if I married
wisely.'

'I suppose not.'

'Of course not!'

They both meditated.

'It wouldn't be possible--would it?'

'Why,' he answered with a laugh, 'last time you were here you spoke in
quite the other way. You were utterly miserable at the thought of living
through it alone.'

'Yes--I don't know whether I could--even if--'

'What are you thinking of?'

'I've been talking with Mary,' she replied, after an uneasy pause.
'She has lived with us so long; and since father's death it seems quite
natural to make a friend of her. No one could be more devoted to me than
she is. I believe there's nothing she wouldn't do. I believe I might
trust her with any secret.'

The obvious suggestion demanded thought.

'By-the-bye,' said Tarrant, looking up, 'have you seen your aunt again?'

Nancy's face changed to a cold expression.

'No. And I don't think I shall.'

'Probably you were as little sympathetic to her as she to you.'

'I don't like her,' was the brief reply.

'I've had curious thoughts about that lady,' said Tarrant, smiling. 'The
mystery, it seems to me, is by no means solved. You think she really
_is_ your aunt?'

'Impossible to doubt it. Any one could see her likeness to Horace at
once.'

'Ah, you didn't mention that. I had a fear that she might be simply an
adventuress, with an eye to your brother's money.'

'She is what she says, I'm sure. But I shall never ask her to come and
see me again, and I don't think she'll want to. That would be fortunate
if--if we wished--'

Tarrant nodded. At the same moment they heard a sound that startled
them.

'That's a knock at the door,' said Nancy, rising as if to escape.

'So it is. Banging with a stick. Let him bang. It must be a stranger, or
he'd respect the oak.'

They sat listening. The knock sounded again, loud and prolonged. Tarrant
joked about it; but a third time came the summons.

'I may as well go and see who it is.'

'Oh--you won't let any one--'

'Of course not. Sit quietly.'

He went out, closing the room-door behind him, and opened the heavy door
which should have ensured his privacy. For five minutes he was absent,
then returned with a face portending news.

'It was Vawdrey. He knew my habit of sporting the oak, and wouldn't go
away till he had made sure. My grandmother is dying. They telegraphed
to Vawdrey in the City, and he came here at once to tell me. I must go.
Perhaps I shall be too late.'

'What did he think of your keeping him outside?'

'I made some sort of excuse. He's a good-natured fellow; it didn't
matter. Stay a little after I'm gone; stay as long as you like, In fact.
You can pull to the inner door when you go.'

'What did the telegram say?'

'Mrs. Tarrant sinking. Come immediately.' Of course we expected it. It's
raining hard: wait and see if it stops; you must take care of yourself.'

For this, Nancy was not slow in exhibiting her gratitude, which served
as mask of the pleasure she could not decently betray. When her husband
had hastened off, she sat for a few minutes in thought; then, alone
here for the first time, she began to walk about the rooms, and to make
herself more intimately acquainted with their contents.



CHAPTER 7



