lofty trifling in which the girl answered his proposal; for assuredly
he esteemed himself no less remarkable a person than he appeared in the
eyes of his sisters, and his vanity had been encouraged by Mr. Lord's
favour. Of his qualities as a man of business there was no doubt; in
one direction or another, he would have struck the road to fortune; why
Nancy should regard him with condescension, and make him feel at
once that his suit was hopeless, puzzled him for many a day. He tried
flattery, affecting to regard her as his superior in things of the
intellect, but only with the mortifying result that Miss. Lord accepted
his humility as quite natural. Then he held apart in dignified reserve,
and found no difficulty in maintaining this attitude until after Mr.
Lord's death. Of course he did not let his relatives know of the repulse
he had suffered, but, when speaking to them of what had happened on
Jubilee night, he made it appear that his estimate of Miss. Lord
was undergoing modification. 'She has lost him, all through her
flightiness,' said the sisters to each other. They were not sorry, and
felt free again to criticise Nancy's ideas of maidenly modesty.

The provisions of Mr. Lord's will could not but trouble the intercourse
between Grove Lane and Dagmar Road. Mr. Barmby, senior, undertook with
characteristic seriousness the guardianship conferred upon him. He had
long interviews with Horace and Nancy, in which he acquitted himself
greatly to his own satisfaction. Samuel, equally a trustee, showed his
delicacy by holding aloof save when civility dictated a call upon the
young people. But his hopes had revived; he was quite willing to wait
three years for Nancy, and it seemed to him more than probable that
this period of reflection would bring the young lady to a sense of his
merits. In the meantime, he would pursue with energy the business now at
his sole direction, and make it far more lucrative than when managed on
Mr. Lord's old-fashioned principles.

As the weeks went on, it seemed more clear than at first that Nancy
resented the authority held by Samuel and his father. They were not
welcome at the house in Grove Lane; the Miss. Barmbys called several
times without being admitted, though they felt sure that Nancy was at
home. Under these circumstances, it became desirable to discover some
intermediary who would keep them acquainted with the details of Nancy's
life and of her brother's. Such intermediary was at hand, in the person
of Miss. Jessica Morgan.



CHAPTER 2



Until of late there had existed a bare acquaintance between Jessica and
the Barmby family. The two or three hours which she perforce spent
in Samuel's company on Jubilee night caused Jessica no little
embarrassment; as a natural result, their meetings after that had a
colour of intimacy, and it was not long before Miss. Morgan and the
Miss. Barmbys began to see more of each other. Nancy, on a motive
correspondent with that which actuated her guardians, desired Jessica's
familiarity with the household in Dagmar Road; her friend could thus
learn and communicate sundry facts of importance, else hidden from her
in the retirement to which she was now condemned. How did the Barmbys
regard her behaviour to them? Did they, in their questioning, betray
any suspicion fraught with danger? Jessica, enjoying the possession of
a most important secret, which she had religiously guarded even from her
mother, made time to accept the Barmbys' invitations pretty frequently,
and invited the girls to her own home as often as she could afford a
little outlay on cakes and preserves.

It made a salutary distraction in her life. As December drew near, she
exhibited alarming symptoms of over-work, and but for the romance which
assured to her an occasional hour of idleness, she must have collapsed
before the date of her examination. As it was, she frightened one of her
pupils, at the end of a long lesson, by falling to the floor and lying
there for ten minutes in unconsciousness. The warning passed unheeded;
day and night she toiled at her insuperable tasks, at times half
frenzied by the strangest lapses of memory, and feeling, the more she
laboured, only the more convinced that at the last moment every fact she
had acquired would ruthlessly desert her.

Her place of abode favoured neither health nor mental tranquillity. It
was one of a row of new houses in a new quarter. A year or two ago the
site had been an enclosed meadow, portion of the land attached to what
was once a country mansion; London, devourer of rural limits, of a
sudden made hideous encroachment upon the old estate, now held by a
speculative builder; of many streets to be constructed, three or four
had already come into being, and others were mapped out, in mud and
inchoate masonry, athwart the ravaged field. Great elms, the pride of
generations passed away, fell before the speculative axe, or were left
standing in mournful isolation to please a speculative architect;
bits of wayside hedge still shivered in fog and wind, amid hoardings
variegated with placards and scaffolding black against the sky. The
very earth had lost its wholesome odour; trampled into mire, fouled with
builders' refuse and the noisome drift from adjacent streets, it sent
forth, under the sooty rain, a smell of corruption, of all the town's
uncleanliness. On this rising locality had been bestowed the title of
'Park.' Mrs. Morgan was decided in her choice of a dwelling here by the
euphonious address, Merton Avenue, Something-or-other Park.

The old mansion--not very old, and far from beautiful, but stoutly
built--stood grim and desolate, long dismantled, and waiting only to be
torn down for the behoof of speculative dealers in old material. What
aforetime was a tree-bordered drive, now curved between dead stumps, a
mere slushy cartway; the stone pillars, which had marked the entrance,
damaged in the rending away of metal with a market value, drooped
sideways, ready at a touch to bury themselves in slime.

Through summer months the Morgans had suffered sufficiently from
the defects of their house; with the coming on of winter, they found
themselves exposed to miseries barely endurable. At the first slight
frost, cistern and water-pipes went to ruin; already so damp that
unlovely vegetation had cropped up on cellar walls, the edifice was now
drenched with torrents of water. Plaster fell from the ceilings; paper
peeled away down the staircase; stuccoed portions of the front began to
crack and moulder. Not a door that would close as a door should; not a
window that would open in the way expected of it; not a fireplace but
discharged its smoke into the room, rather than by the approved
channel. Everywhere piercing draughts, which often entered by orifices
unexplained and unexplainable. From cellar floor to chimney-pot, no
square inch of honest or trustworthy workmanship. So thin were the
parti-walls that conversation not only might, but must, be distinctly
heard from room to room, and from house to house; the Morgans learnt to
subdue their voices, lest all they said should become common property of
the neighbourhood. For the privilege of occupying such a residence, 'the
interior,' said advertisement, 'handsomely decorated,' they were racked
with an expenditure which, away in the sweet-scented country, would have
housed them amid garden graces and orchard fruitfulness.

At this time, Mr. Morgan had joined an acquaintance in the establishment
of a debt-collecting agency; his partner provided the modest capital
needful for such an enterprise, and upon himself fell the disagreeable
work. A man of mild temper and humane instincts, he spent his day in
hunting people who would not or could not pay the money they owed,
straining his wits to circumvent the fraudulent, and swooping
relentlessly upon the victims of misfortune. The occupation revolted
him, but at present he saw no other way of supporting the genteel
appearances which--he knew not why--were indispensable to his life. He
subsisted like a bird of prey; he was ever on the look out for carrion
which the law permitted him to seize. From the point of view forced upon
him, society became a mere system of legalised rapine. 'You are in debt;
behold the bond. Behold, too, my authority for squeezing out of you the
uttermost farthing. You must beg or starve? I deplore it, but I, for my
part, have a genteel family to maintain on what I rend from your grip.'
He set his forehead against shame; he stooped to the basest chicanery;
he exposed himself to insult, to curses, to threats of violence.
Sometimes a whole day of inconceivably sordid toil resulted in the
pouching of a few pence; sometimes his reward was a substantial sum. He
knew himself despised by many of the creditors who employed him. 'Bad
debts? For how much will you sell them to me?' And as often as not he
took away with his bargain a glance which was equivalent to a kick.

The genteel family knew nothing of these expedients. Mrs. Morgan talked
dolorously to her friends of 'commercial depression,' and gave it to be
vaguely understood that her husband had suffered great losses because
he conducted his affairs in the spirit of a gentleman. Her son was in an
office;' her elder daughter was attempting the art of fiction, which
did not promise to be lucrative; Jessica, more highly educated, would
shortly matriculate at the University of London--a consoling prospect,
but involving the payment of a fee that could with difficulty be
afforded.

Every friend of the family held it a matter of course that Jessica would
succeed in the examination. It seemed probable that she would have a
place in Honours.

And, meanwhile, the poor girl herself was repenting of the indiscreet
boastfulness with which she had made known her purpose. To come out in
an inferior class would be painful enough; how support the possibility
of absolute failure? Yet she knew only too well that in certain
'subjects' she was worse than shaky. Her Greek--her Chemistry--her
Algebra--

By way of propitiating the stern fates, she began to talk with Lucy and
Amelia Barmby in a tone of diffidence. Half a year ago, she would have
held her head very high in such company; now the simple goodness of the
old-fashioned girls made an appeal to her aching heart, and their homely
talk soothed her exhausted brain.

'It's fearfully difficult,' she said to them one evening, as she sat
in their parlour. 'And I lose so much time with my pupils. Really, you
know, I haven't a fair chance. I was showing Nancy Lord the Algebra
paper set last summer, and she confessed she could hardly do a single
question.'

'She couldn't?' exclaimed one of the sisters in astonishment. 'But we
always thought she was so very clever.'

'So she is--in many things. But she never dreamt of going in for such an
examination as this.'

'And do you really know more than she does?'

Jessica smiled with affected modesty.

'Oh, I have studied so much more.'

It was sweet to gain this triumph over her friend, whose progress in
the school of life she watched with the jealousy of a girl condemned to
sterile passions.

Their talk was interrupted by the entrance of Samuel Barmby, and his
elder sister, addressing him without reflection, said wonderingly:

'Sam, did you know that Nancy Lord couldn't pass the examination that
Miss. Morgan is going in for?'

Jessica blushed, and hastened to extenuate this crude statement.

'Oh, I didn't say that. Only that she would have to study very hard if
she went in for the matriculation.'

'Of course she would,' Samuel assented, largely, as he took his stand
before the fireplace and beamed upon the female trio. 'Miss Lord goes
in for broad culture; that's quite a different thing from studying for
examinations.'

To the hearers, Jessica not excepted, this seemed to argue the spirit of
broad culture in Samuel himself. Miss. Morgan pursued nervously:

'Examinations are nothing. I believe very stupid people often do well in
them, and clever people often fail.'

Her voice sank on the last word, and she tried to read Barmby's face
without meeting his look. Of late, a change had come about in her
estimation of Samuel. Formerly she spoke of him with contemptuous
amusement, in the tone set by Nancy; since she had become a friend of
the family, his sisters' profound respect had influenced her way of
thinking, and in secret she was disposed rather to admire 'the
Prophet.' He had always struck her as a comely man, and, her education
notwithstanding, she never perceived in his remarks that downright
imbecility which excited Nancy's derision. On Jubilee night he was
anything but a tedious companion; apart from her critical friend,
Jessica had listened without impatience to his jests, his instructive
facts, his flowing rhetoric. Now-a-days, in her enfeebled state of
body and mind, she began to look forward with distinct pleasure to her
occasional meetings with Samuel, pleasure which perhaps was enhanced
by the air of condescension wherewith he tempered his courtesy. Morbid
miseries brought out the frailty of her character. Desiring to be highly
esteemed by Mr. Barmby, she found herself no less willing to join his
sisters in a chorus of humbly feminine admiration, when he discoursed
to them from an altitude. At moments, after gazing upon his eloquent
countenance, she was beset by strange impulses which brought blood to
her cheek, and made her dread the Miss. Barmbys' scrutiny.

'I look upon examinations,' Samuel was saying, 'as a professional
matter. I never went in for them myself, simply because I--I turned my
energies in another direction.'

'You _could_ have passed them,' remarked one of his sisters, 'easily
enough.'

'In Miss. Morgan's presence,'--he stroked his chin, and smiled with
delicious fatuity--'I prefer to say nothing on that point.'

'Oh but of course you could, Mr. Barmby,' sounded Jessica's voice, in
an unsteady falsetto, whilst her eyes were turned upon the floor. 'You
would have thought nothing of this matriculation, which seems to me so
dreadful.'

Profoundly flattered, Samuel addressed the girl in his suavest tones.

'I have a theory, Miss. Morgan, that young ladies ought not to undergo
these ordeals. The delicacy of their nervous system unfits them for such
a strain. I'm sure we shall all feel very glad when you are successfully
through the trial. After it, you ought to have a long rest.'

'Oh, you ought--indeed you ought,' assented the girls.

'By the bye,' said Samuel, 'my father has heard from Miss. Lord that she
is going away for a month or two. She says her health requires it.'

Jessica sat silent, still with downcast eyes.

'But it's a new thing, isn't it,' remarked Amelia, 'for Miss. Lord to be
in bad health?'

'She has suffered a good deal, I'm afraid,' said Jessica, 'since her
father's death. The doctor tells her she oughtn't to live in that dull
house through the winter.'

'In that case,' Samuel exclaimed, 'of course she must go at once--of
course!'

He never spoke of Nancy but with stress of unctuous generosity. This, if
his hearers knew what he had suffered at her hands, must tell greatly
to his credit; if they were not aware of the circumstances, such a tone
would become him as the young lady's hopeful admirer.

'I fear her nerves are affected,' pursued Jessica. 'She can't
bear society. So unlike her, isn't it? She goes out very little
indeed,--sometimes not for days together. And really she sees nobody.
I'm getting quite anxious about her.'

The subject was an awkward one in this house, and it soon gave place to
freer conversation. On her way home, though mechanically repeating dates
and formulae, Jessica could not resist the tendency of her thoughts,
to dwell on Samuel's features and Samuel's eloquence. This was a new
danger; she had now little more than a fortnight for her final 'cram,'
and any serious distraction meant ruin.

In a day or two she took leave of Nancy, who had chosen for her winter
retreat no less remote a spot than Falmouth. Horace having settled
himself in lodgings, the house was to be shut up; Mary Woodruff of
course went down into Cornwall. Nancy had written a letter to Mr.
Barmby, senior, excusing herself for not being able to see him before
her departure; it was an amiable letter, but contained frank avowal of
pain and discontent at the prospect of her long pupilage. 'Of course I
submit to the burden my father chose to lay upon me, and before long,
I hope, I shall be able to take things in a better spirit. All I ask of
you, dear Mr. Barmby, is to have forbearance with me until I get back
my health and feel more cheerful. You know that I could not be in better
hands whilst Mary is with me. I shall write frequently, and give you
an account of myself. Let me hear sometimes, and show me that you make
allowance for my very trying position.'

Jessica heard the letter discussed by its recipient and his family.
Samuel spoke with his wonted magnanimity; his father took a liberal view
of the matter. And in writing to her friend a few days later, Jessica
was able to say: 'I think you may safely stay at Falmouth for the whole
winter. You will not be interfered with if you write nicely. I shouldn't
wonder if they would let you keep out of their reach _as long as it is
necessary_.'

The week of Jessica's ordeal was now at hand. She had had another
fainting-fit; her sleep was broken every night with hideous dreams; she
ate scarce enough to keep herself alive; a perpetual fever parched her
throat and burned at her temples.

On the last day of 'cram,' she sat from morning to night in her
comfortless little bedroom, bending over the smoky fire, reading
desperately through a pile of note-books. The motive of vanity no
longer supported her; gladly she would have crept away into a life of
insignificance; but the fee for the examination was paid, and she must
face the terrors, the shame, that waited her at Burlington House. No
hope of 'passing.' Perhaps at the last moment a stroke of mortal illness
would come to her relief.

Not so. She found herself in the ghastly torture-hall, at a desk on
which lay sheets of paper, not whiter than her face. Somebody gave her
a scroll, stereotyped in imitation of manuscript--the questions to be
answered. For a quarter of an hour she could not understand a word. She
saw the face of Samuel Barmby, and heard his tones--'The delicacy of a
young lady's nervous system unfits her for such a strain.'

That evening she went home with a half-formed intention of poisoning
herself.

But the morrow saw her seated again before another scroll of stereotype,
still thinking of Samuel Barmby, still hearing his voice. The man was
grown hateful to her; he seemed to haunt her brain malignantly, and to
paralyse her hand.

Day after day in the room of torture, until all was done. Then upon her
long despair followed a wild, unreasoning hope. Though it rained, she
walked all the way home, singing, chattering to herself, and reached the
house-door without consciousness of the distance she had traversed. Her
mother and sister came out into the hall; they had been watching for
her.

'I did a good paper to-day--I think I've passed after all--yes, I feel
sure I've passed!'

'You look dreadful,' exclaimed Mrs. Morgan. 'And you're wet through--'

'I did a good paper to-day--I feel sure I've passed!'

She sat down to a meal, but could not swallow.

'I feel sure I've passed--I feel sure--'

And she fell from the chair, to all appearances stone-dead.

They took her upstairs, undressed her, sent for the doctor. When he
came, she had been lying for half-an-hour conscious, but mute. She
looked gravely at him, and said, as if repeating a lesson:

'The delicacy of a young lady's nervous system unfits her for such a
strain.'

'Undoubtedly,' repeated the doctor, with equal gravity.

'But,' she added eagerly, 'let Mr. Barmby know at once that I have
passed.'

'He shall know at once,' said the doctor.



CHAPTER 3



A lady who lived at Kilburn, and entertained largely in a house not
designed for large entertainment, was 'at home' this evening. At eleven
o'clock the two drawing-rooms contained as many people as could sit and
stand with semblance of comfort; around the hostess, on the landing,
pressed a crowd, which grew constantly thicker by affluence from the
staircase. In the hall below a 'Hungarian band' discoursed very loud
music. Among recent arrivals appeared a troupe of nigger minstrels,
engaged to give their exhilarating entertainment--if space could be
found for them. Bursts of laughter from the dining-room announced the
success of an American joker, who, in return for a substantial cheque,
provided amusement in fashionable gatherings. A brilliant scene. The
air, which encouraged perspiration, was rich with many odours; voices
endeavouring to make themselves audible in colloquy, swelled to a
tumultuous volume that vied with the Hungarian clangours.

In a corner of the staircase, squeezed behind two very fat women in very
low dresses, stood Horace Lord. His heated countenance wore a look of
fretful impatience; he kept rising upon his toes in an endeavour to
distinguish faces down in the hall. At length his expression changed,
and with eager eyes he began to force a way for himself between the
fat women. Not unrewarded with glaring glances, and even with severe
remarks, he succeeded in gaining the foot of the staircase, and came
within reach of the persons for whom he had been waiting. These were
Mrs. Damerel and Fanny French. The elder lady exhibited a toilet of
opulence corresponding with her mature charms; the younger, as became a
_debutante_, wore graceful white, symbol of her maiden modesty.

'You promised to be early,' said Horace, addressing Mrs. Damerel,
but regarding Fanny, who stood in conversation with a florid man of
uncertain age.

'Couldn't get here before, my dear boy.'

'Surely you haven't brought that fellow with you?'

'Hush! You mustn't talk in that way. We met at the door. Mrs. Dane knows
him. What does it matter?'

Horace moved aside to Fanny. Flushed with excitement, her hair adorned
with flowers, she looked very pretty.

'Come along,' he said, gripping her hand more violently than he
intended. 'Let us get upstairs.'

'Oh, you hurt me! Don't be so silly.'

The man beside her gave Horace a friendly nod. His name was Mankelow.
Horace had met him once or twice of late at Mrs. Damerel's, but did not
like him, and felt still less disposed to do so now that Mankelow
was acquainted with Fanny French. He suspected that the two were more
familiar than Fanny pretended. With little ceremony, he interposed
himself between the girl and this possible rival.

'Why didn't you make her come earlier?' he said to Fanny, as they began
a slow upward struggle in the rear of Mrs. Damerel.

'It isn't fashionable to come early.'

'Nonsense! Look at the people here already.'

Fanny threw up her chin, and glanced back to see that Mankelow was
following. In his vexation, Horace was seized with a cough--a cough
several times repeated before he could check it.

'Your cold's no better,' said Fanny. 'You oughtn't to have come out at
night.'

'It _is_ better,' he replied sharply. 'That's the first time I've
coughed to-day. Do you mean you would rather not have found me here?'

'How silly you are! People will hear what you're saying.'

It was Fanny's 'first season,' but not her first 'at home.' Mrs. Damerel
seemed to be taking an affectionate interest in her, and had introduced
her to several people. Horace, gratified in the beginning, now suffered
from jealousy; it tortured him to observe Fanny when she talked with
men. That her breeding was defective, mattered nothing in this
composite world of pseudo-elegance. Young Lord, who did not lack native
intelligence, understood by this time that Mrs. Damerel and her friends
were far from belonging to a high order of society; he saw vulgarity
rampant in every drawing-room to which he was admitted, and occasionally
heard things which startled his suburban prejudices. But Fanny, in
her wild enjoyment of these novel splendours, appeared to lose all
self-control. She flirted outrageously, and before his very eyes. If he
reproached her, she laughed at him; if he threatened to free himself,
she returned a look which impudently bade him try. Horace had all her
faults by heart, and no longer tried to think that he respected her, or
that, if he married such a girl, his life could possibly be a happy one;
but she still played upon his passions, and at her beck he followed like
a dog.

The hostess, Mrs. Dane, a woman who looked as if she had once been
superior to the kind of life she now led, welcomed him with peculiar
warmth, and in a quick confidential voice bade him keep near her for a
few minutes.

'There's some one I want to introduce you to--some one I'm sure you will
like to know.'

Obeying her, he soon lost sight of Fanny; but Mrs. Dane continued to
talk, at intervals, in such a flattering tone, that his turbid emotions
were soothed. He had heard of the Chittles? No? They were very old
friends of hers, said Mrs. Dane, and she particularly wanted him to know
them. Ah, here they came; mother and daughter. Horace observed them.
Mrs. Chittle was a frail, worn, nervous woman, who must once have been
comely; her daughter, a girl of two-and-twenty, had a pale, thin face of
much sweetness and gentleness. They seemed by no means at home in this
company; but Mrs. Chittle, when she conversed, assumed a vivacious air;
the daughter, trying to follow her example, strove vainly against an
excessive bashfulness, and seldom raised her eyes. Why he should be
expected to pay special attention to these people, Horace was at a loss
to understand; but Mrs. Chittle attached herself to him, and soon led
him into familiar dialogue. He learnt from her that they had lived for
two or three years in a very quiet country place; they had come up for
the season, but did not know many people. She spoke of her daughter, who
stood just out of earshot,--her eyes cast down, on her face a sad fixed
smile,--and said that it had been necessary almost to force her into
society. 'She loves the country, and is so fond of books; but at her age
it's really a shame to live like a nun--don't you think so, Mr. Lord?'
Decidedly it was, said Horace. 'I'm doing my best,' pursued Mrs.
Chittle, 'to cure her of her shyness. She is really afraid of
people--and it's such a pity. She says that the things people talk about
don't interest her; but _all_ people are not frivolous--are they, Mr.
Lord?' Horace hoped not; and presently out of mere good-nature he tried
to converse with the young lady in a way that should neither alarm her
shyness nor prove distasteful to her intelligence. But with very
little success. From time to time the girl glanced at him with strange
timidity, yet seemed quite willing to listen as long as he chose to
talk.

Fanny, being at a considerable distance from home, was to return to the
boarding-house where her chaperon now lived, and have a room there
for the night. Horace disliked this arrangement, for the objectionable
Mankelow lived in the same house. When he was able to get speech with
Fanny, he tried to persuade her to go with him all the way home to
Camberwell in a cab. Miss. French would not listen to the suggestion.

'Who ever heard of such a thing? It wouldn't be proper.'

'Proper! Oh, I like that!' he replied, with scathing irony.

'You can either like it or not. Mrs. Damerel wouldn't dream of allowing
it. I think she's quite as good a judge of propriety as you are.'

They were in a corner of the dining-room. Fanny, having supped much to
her satisfaction, had a high colour, and treated her lover with more
than usual insolence. Horace had eaten little, but had not refrained
from beverages; he was disposed to assert himself.

'It seems to me that we ought to have an understanding. You never do as
I wish in a single thing. What do you mean by it?'

'Oh, if you're going to be nasty--'

She made the gesture of a servant-girl who quarrels with her young man
at the street-corner.

'I can't stand the kind of treatment you've given me lately,' said
Horace, with muffled anger.

'I've told you I shall do just as I like.'

'Very well. That's as much as to say that you care nothing about me. I'm
not going to be the slave of a girl who has no sense of honour--not even
of decency. If you wish me to speak to you again you must speak first.'

And he left her, Fanny laughing scornfully.

It drew towards one o'clock when, having exhausted the delights of the
evening, and being in a decidedly limp condition, Mrs. Damerel and her
protegee drove home. Fanny said nothing of what had passed between her
and Horace. The elder lady, after keeping silence for half the drive,
spoke at length in a tone of indulgent playfulness.

'So you talked a good deal with Mr. Mankelow?'

'Not for long. Now and then. He took me down to supper--the first time.'

'I'm afraid somebody will be a little jealous. I shall get into trouble.
I didn't foresee this.'

'Somebody must treat me in a reasonable way,' Fanny answered, with a dry
laugh.

'I'm quite sure he will,' said Mrs. Damerel suavely. 'But I feel myself
a little responsible, you know. Let me put you on your guard against Mr.
Mankelow. I'm afraid he's rather a dangerous man. I have heard rather
alarming stories about him. You see he's very rich, and very rich men,
if they're rather handsome as well, say and do things--you understand?'

'Is he really very rich?'

'Well, several thousands a year, and a prospect of more when relatives
die. I don't mean to say that he is a bad man. He belongs to a very good
family, and I believe him perfectly honourable. He would never do any
one any harm--or, if he happened to, without meaning it, I'm quite sure
he'd repair it in the honourable way.'

'You said he was dangerous--'

'To a young lady who is already engaged. Confess that you think him
rather good-looking.'

Having inflamed the girl's imagination, Mrs. Damerel presently dropped
the subject, and fell again into weary silence.

At noon of the next day she received a call from Horace, who found her
over tea and toast in her private sitting-room. The young man looked
bilious; he coughed, too, and said that he must have caught fresh cold
last night.

'That house was like an oven. I won't go to any more such places. That
isn't my idea of enjoying myself.'

Mrs. Damerel examined him with affectionate solicitude, and reflected
before speaking.

'Haven't you been living rather fast lately?'

He avoided her eyes.

'Not at all.'

'Quite sure? How much money have you spent this last month?'

'Not much.'

By careful interrogation--the caressing notes of her voice seemed to
convey genuine feeling--Mrs. Damerel elicited the fact that he had spent
not less than fifty pounds in a few weeks. She looked very grave.

'What would our little Fanny say to this?'

'I don't care what she would say.'

And he unburdened himself of his complaints against the frivolous
charmer, Mrs. Damerel listening with a compassionate smile.

'I'm afraid it's all too true, dear boy. But didn't I warn you?'

'You have made her worse. And I more than half believe you have
purposely put her in the way of that fellow Mankelow. Now I tell you
plainly'--his voice quivered--'if I lose her, I'll raise all the money I
can and play the very devil.'

'Hush! no naughty words! Let us talk about something else till you are
quieter.--What did you think of Mrs. Chittle?'

'I thought nothing of her, good or bad.'

'Of her daughter, then. Isn't she a sweet, quiet girl? Do you know that
she is rich? It's perfectly true. Mrs. Chittle is the widow of a man who
made a big fortune out of a kind of imitation velvet. It sold only for a
few years, then something else drove it out of the market; but the money
was made. I know all about it from Mrs. Dane.'

'It's nothing to me,' said Horace peevishly.

But Mrs. Damerel continued:

'The poor girl has been very unfortunate. In the last year of her
father's life they lived in good style, town-house and country-house.
And she fell in love with somebody who--who treated her badly; broke it
off, in fact, just before the wedding. She had a bad illness, and since
then she has lived as her mother told you.'

'How do you know she told me?'

'I--oh, I took it for granted. She said you had had a long talk. You can
see, of course, that they're not ordinary people. Didn't Winifred--her
name is Winifred--strike you as very refined and lady-like?'

'She hardly spoke half-a-dozen words.'

'That's her nervousness. She has quite got out of the habit of society.
But she's very clever, and so good. I want you to see more of her.
If she comes here to tea, will you--just to please me--look in for
half-an-hour?'

She bent her head aside, wistfully. Horace vouchsafed no reply.

'Dear boy, I know very well what a disappointment you are suffering. Why
not be quite open with me? Though I'm only a tiresome old aunt, I feel
every bit as anxious for your happiness as if I were your mother--I do
indeed, Horace. You believe me, don't you?'

'You have been very kind, in many ways. But you've done harm to Fanny--'

'No harm whatever, Horace--believe me. I have only given her an
opportunity of showing what she really is. You see now that she thinks
of nothing at all but money and selfish pleasures. Compare her, my dear,
with such a girl as Winifred Chittle. I only mean--just to show you the
difference between a lady and such a girl as Fanny. She has treated you
abominably, my poor boy. And what would she bring you? Not that I wish
you to marry for money. I have seen too much of the world to be so
foolish, so wicked. But when there _are_ sweet, clever, lady-like girls,
with large incomes--! And a handsome boy like you! You may blush, but
there's no harm in telling the truth. You are far too modest. You don't
know how you look in the eyes of an affectionate, thoughtful girl--like
Winifred, for instance. It's dreadful to think of you throwing yourself
away! My dear, it may sound shocking to you, but Fanny French isn't the
sort of girl that men _marry_.'

Horace showed himself startled.

'You are so young,' pursued the mature lady, with an indulgent smile.
'You need the advice of some one who knows the world. In years to come,
you will feel very grateful to me. Now don't let us talk any more of
that, just now; but tell me something about Nancy. How much longer does
she mean to stay in Cornwall?'

He answered absently.

'She talks of another month or two.'

'But what have her guardians to say to that? Why, she has been away for
nearly half a year. How can that be called living at the old house?'

'It's no business of mine.'

'Nor of mine, you mean to say. Still, it does seem rather strange. I
suppose she is quite to be trusted?'

'Trusted? What harm can come to her? She's keeping out of Sam Barmby's
way, that's all. I believe he plagued her to marry him. A nice husband
for Nancy!'

'I wish we had taken to each other,' said Mrs. Damerel musingly. 'I
think she was a little jealous of the attention I had paid to _you_. But
perhaps we shall do better some day. And I'm quite content so long as
_you_ care a little for me, dear boy. You'll never give me up, will
you?'

It was asked with unusual show of feeling; she leaned forward, her eyes
fixed tenderly upon the boy's face.

'You would never let a Fanny French come between us, Horace dear?'

'I only wish you hadn't brought her among your friends.'

'Some day you will be glad of what I did. Whatever happens, I am your
best friend--the best and truest friend you will ever have. You will
know it some day.'

The voice impressed Horace, its emotion was so true. Several times
through the day he recalled and thought of it. As yet he had felt
nothing like affection for Mrs. Damerel, but before their next meeting
an impulse he did not try to account for caused him to write her
a letter--simply to assure her that he was not ungrateful for her
kindness. The reply that came in a few hours surprised and touched him,
for it repeated in yet warmer words all she had spoken. 'Let me be in
the place of a mother to you, dear Horace. Think of me as if I were your
mother. If I were your mother indeed, I could not love you more.' He
mused over this, and received from it a sense of comfort which was quite
new to him.

All through the winter he had been living as a gentleman of assured
independence. This was managed very simply. Acting on Mrs. Damerel's
counsel he insured his life, and straightaway used the policy as
security for a loan of five hundred pounds from a friend of Mrs.
Damerel's. The insurance itself was not effected without a disagreeable
little episode. As a result of the medical examination, Horace learnt,
greatly to his surprise, that he would have to pay a premium somewhat
higher than the ordinary. Unpleasant questions were asked: Was he quite
sure that he knew of no case of consumption in his family? Quite sure,
he answered stoutly, and sincerely. Why? Did the doctor think _him_
consumptive? Oh dear no, but--a slight constitutional weakness. In fine,
the higher premium must be exacted. He paid it with the indifference of
his years, but said nothing to Mrs. Damerel.

And thereupon began the sowing of wild oats. At two-and-twenty, after
domestic restraint and occupations that he detested, he was let loose
upon life. Five hundred pounds seemed to him practically inexhaustible.
He did not wish to indulge in great extravagance; merely to see and to
taste the world.

Ah, the rapture of those first nights, when he revelled amid the tumult
of London, pursuing joy with a pocket full of sovereigns! Theatres,
music-halls, restaurants and public-houses--he had seen so little of
these things, that they excited him as they do a lad fresh from the
country. He drew the line nowhere. Love of a worthy woman tells for
chastity even in the young and the sensual; love of a Fanny French
merely debauches the mind and inflames the passions. Secure in his
paganism, Horace followed where the lures of London beckoned him; he
knew not reproach of conscience; shame offered but thin resistance to
his boiling blood. By a miracle he had as yet escaped worse damage to
health than a severe cold, caught one night after heroic drinking. That
laid him by the heels for a time, and the cough still clung to him.

In less than two years he would command seven thousand pounds, and a
share in the business now conducted by Samuel Barmby. What need to stint
himself whilst he felt able to enjoy life? If Fanny deceived him, were
there not, after all, other and better Fannys to be won by his money?
For it was a result of this girl's worthlessness that Horace, in most
things so ingenuous, had come to regard women with unconscious cynicism.
He did not think he could be loved for his own sake, but he believed
that, at any time, the show of love, perhaps its ultimate sincerity,
might be won by display of cash.

Midway in the month of May he again caught a severe cold, and was
confined to the house for nearly three weeks. Mrs. Damerel, who nursed
him well and tenderly, proposed that he should go down for change of
air to Falmouth. He wrote to Nancy, asking whether she would care to
see him. A prompt reply informed him that his sister was on the point
of returning to London, so that he had better choose some nearer seaside
resort.

He went to Hastings for a few days, but wearied of the place, and came
back to his London excitements. Nancy, however, had not yet returned;
nor did she until the beginning of July.



CHAPTER 4



This winter saw the establishment of the South London Fashionable Dress
Supply Association--the name finally selected by Beatrice French and her
advisers. It was an undertaking shrewdly conceived, skilfully planned,
and energetically set going. Beatrice knew the public to which her
advertisements appealed; she understood exactly the baits that would
prove irresistible to its folly and greed. In respect that it was a
public of average mortals, it would believe that business might be
conducted to the sole advantage of the customer. In respect that it
consisted of women, it would give eager attention to a scheme that
permitted each customer to spend her money, and yet to have it. In
respect that it consisted of ignorant and pretentious women, this
public could be counted upon to deceive itself in the service of its own
vanity, and maintain against all opposition that the garments obtained
on this soothing system were supremely good and fashionable.

On a basis of assumptions such as these, there was every possibility of
profitable commerce without any approach to technical fraud.

By means of the familiar 'goose-club,' licensed victuallers make
themselves the bankers of people who are too weak-minded to save their
own money until they wish to spend it, and who are quite content to
receive in ultimate return goods worth something less than half the
deposit. By means of the familiar teapot, grocers persuade their
customers that an excellent trade can be done by giving away the whole
profit on each transaction. Beatrice French, an observant young woman,
with a head for figures, had often noted and reflected upon these two
egregious illustrations of human absurdity. Her dressmaking enterprise
assimilated the features of both, and added novel devices that sprang
from her own fruitful brain. The 'Fashion Club,' a wheel within a wheel,
was merely the goose-club; strictly a goose-club, for the licensed
victualler addresses himself to the male of the species. The larger net,
cast for those who lacked money or a spirit of speculation, caught all
who, in the realm of grocery, are lured by the teapot. Every sovereign
spent with the Association carried a bonus, paid not in cash but in
kind. These startling advantages were made known through the medium
of hand-bills, leaflets, nicely printed little pamphlets, gorgeously
designed placards; the publicity department, being in the hands of Mr.
Luckworth Crewe, of Farringdon Street, was most ably and vigorously
conducted.

Thanks also to Luckworth Crewe, Beatrice had allied herself with
partners, who brought to the affair capital, experience, and activity.
Before Christmas--an important point--the scene of operations was ready:
a handsome shop, with the new and attractive appendages (so-called
'club-room,' refreshment-bar, &c.) which Crewe and Beatrice had visioned
in their prophetic minds. Before the close of the year substantial
business had been done, and 1888 opened with exhilarating prospects.

The ineptitude of uneducated English women in all that relates to their
attire is a fact that it boots not to enlarge upon. Beatrice French
could not be regarded as an exception; for though she recognised
monstrosities, she very reasonably distrusted her own taste in the
choice of a garment. For her sisters, monstrosities had a distinct
charm, and to this class of women belonged all customers of the
Association who pretended to think for themselves as to wherewithal they
should be clothed. But women in general came to the shop with confessed
blankness of mind; beyond the desire to buy something that was modish,
and to pay for it in a minus quantity, they knew, felt, thought nothing
whatever. Green or violet, cerulean or magenta, all was one to them.
In the matter of shape they sought merely a confident assurance from
articulate man or woman--themselves being somewhat less articulate than
jay or jackdaw--that this or that was 'the feature of the season.' They
could not distinguish between a becoming garment and one that called for
the consuming fires of Heaven. It is often assumed as a commonplace that
women, whatever else they cannot do, may be trusted to make up their
minds about habiliments. Nothing more false, as Beatrice French was
abundantly aware. A very large proportion of the servant-keeping females
in Brixton, Camberwell, and Peckham could not, with any confidence, buy
a chemise or a pair of stockings; and when it came to garments visible,
they were lost indeed.

Fanny French began to regret that she had not realised her capital, and
put it into the Association. Wishing at length to do so, she met with a
scornful rebuff. Beatrice would have none of her money, but told her she
might use the shop like any other customer, which of course Fanny did.

Mrs. Peachey, meanwhile, kept declaring to both her sisters that they
must not expect to live henceforth in De Crespigny Park on the old
nominal terms. Beatrice was on the way to wealth; Fanny moved in West
End society, under the chaperonage of a rich woman; they ought to be
ashamed of themselves for not volunteering handsome recognition of the
benefits they had received beneath their sister's roof. But neither
Beatrice nor Fanny appeared to see the matter in this light. The truth
was, that they both had in view a change of domicile. The elder desired
more comfort and more independence than De Crespigny Park could afford
her; the younger desired a great many things, and flattered herself that
a very simple step would put her in possession of them.

The master of the house no longer took any interest in the fortunes of
his sisters-in-law. He would not bid them depart, he would not bid them
stay, least of all would he demand money from them. Of money he had no
need, and he was the hapless possessor of a characteristic not to be
found in any other member of his household--natural delicacy.

Arthur Peachey lived only for his child, the little boy, whose newly
prattling tongue made the sole welcome he expected or cared for on his
return from a hard day's work. Happily the child had good health, but
he never left home without dread of perils that might befall it in his
absence. On the mother he counted not at all; a good-tempered cow
might with more confidence have been set to watch over the little one's
safety. The nurse-girl Emma, retained in spite of her mistress's malice,
still seemed to discharge her duties faithfully; but, being mortal, she
demanded intervals of leisure from time to time, and at such seasons,
as Peachey too well knew, the child was uncared for. Had his heart been
resolute as it was tender, he would long ago have carried out a project
which haunted him at every moment of anger or fear. In the town of
Canterbury lived a sister of his who for several years had been happily
wedded, but remained childless. If the worst came to the worst, if his
wife compelled him to the breaking-up of a home which was no home, this
married sister would gladly take the little boy into her motherly care.
He had never dared to propose the step; but Ada might perchance
give ready assent to it, even now. For motherhood she had no single
qualification but the physical. Before her child's coming into the
world, she snarled at the restraints it imposed upon her; at its birth,
she clamoured against nature for the pains she had to undergo, and hated
her husband because he was the intermediate cause of them. The helpless
infant gave her no pleasure, touched no emotion in her heart, save when
she saw it in the nurse's care, and received female compliments upon its
beauty. She rejected it at night because it broke her sleep; in the
day, because she could not handle it without making it cry. When Peachey
remonstrated with her, she stared in insolent surprise, and wished that
_he_ had had to suffer all her hardships of the past year.

Peachey could not be said to have any leisure. On returning from
business he was involved forthwith in domestic troubles and broils,
which consumed the dreary evening, and invaded even his sleep. Thus it
happened that at long intervals he was tempted, instead of going home
to dinner, to spend a couple of hours at a certain small eating-house, a
resort of his bachelor days, where he could read the newspapers, have
a well-cooked chop in quietude, and afterwards, if acquaintances were
here, play a game of chess. Of course he had to shield this modest
dissipation with a flat falsehood, alleging to his wife that business
had kept him late. Thus on an evening of June, when the soft air and the
mellow sunlight overcame him with a longing for rest, he despatched a
telegram to De Crespigny Park, and strolled quietly about the streets
until the hour and his appetite pointed him tablewards. The pity of
it was that he could not dismiss anxieties; he loathed the coward
falsehood, and thought more of home than of his present freedom. But at
least Ada's tongue was silent.

He seated himself in the familiar corner, and turned over illustrated
papers, whilst his chop hissed on the grid. Ah, if he were but
unmarried, what a life he might make for himself now that the day's
labour brought its ample reward! He would have rooms in London, and a
still, clean lodging somewhere among the lanes and fields. His ideals
expressed the homeliness of the man. On intellect he could not pride
himself; his education had been but of the 'commercial' order; he liked
to meditate rather than to read; questions of the day concerned him not
at all. A weak man, but of clean and kindly instincts. In mercantile
life he had succeeded by virtue of his intensely methodical habits--the
characteristic which made him suffer so from his wife's indolence,
incapacity, and vicious ill-humour.

Before his marriage he had thought of women as domestic beings. A wife
was the genius of home. He knew men who thanked their wives for all the
prosperity and content that they enjoyed. Others he knew who told quite
a different tale, but these surely were sorrowful exceptions. Nowadays
he saw the matter in a light of fuller experience. In his rank of life
married happiness was a rare thing, and the fault could generally be
traced to wives who had no sense of responsibility, no understanding of
household duties, no love of simple pleasures, no religion.

Yes, there was the point--no religion. Ada had grown up to regard
church-going as a sign of respectability, but without a shadow of
religious faith. Her incredible ignorance of the Bible story, of
Christian dogmas, often amazed him. Himself a believer, though careless
in the practice of forms, he was not disturbed by the modern tendency to
look for morals apart from faith; he had not the trouble of reflecting
that an ignorant woman is the last creature to be moralised by anything
but the Christian code; he saw straight into the fact--that there was
no hope of impressing Ada with ideas of goodness, truthfulness, purity,
simply because she recognised no moral authority.

For such minds no moral authority--merely as a moral authority--is
or can be valid. Such natures are ruled only by superstition--the
representative of reasoned faith in nobler beings. Rob them of their
superstition, and they perish amid all uncleanliness.

Thou shalt not lie--for God consumes a liar in the flames of hell! Ada
Peachey could lend ear to no admonition short of that. And, living when
she did, bred as she was, only a John Knox could have impressed her with
this menace--to be forgotten when the echoes of his voice had failed.

He did not enjoy his chop this evening. In the game of chess that
followed he played idly, with absent thoughts. And before the glow
of sunset had died from the calm heaven he set out to walk homeward,
anxious, melancholy.

On approaching the house he suffered, as always, from quickened pulse
and heart constricted with fear. Until he knew that all was well, he
looked like a man who anticipates dread calamity. This evening, on
opening the door, he fell back terror-stricken. In the hall stood a
police-constable, surrounded by a group of women: Mrs. Peachey, her
sisters, Emma the nurse-girl, and two other servants.

'Oh, here you are at last!' exclaimed his wife, in a voice exhausted
with rage. 'You're just in time to see this beast taken off to the
