lock-up. Perhaps you'll believe me now!'

'What is it? What has she done?'

'Stolen money, that's what she's done--your precious Emma! She's been at
it for a long time; I've told you some one was robbing me. So I marked
some coins in my purse, and left it in the bedroom whilst we were at
dinner; and then, when I found half-a-crown gone--and it was her evening
out, too--I sent for a policeman before she knew anything, and we made
her turn out her pockets. And there's the half-crown! Perhaps you'll
believe it this time!'

The girl's face declared her guilt; she had hardly attempted denial.
Then, with a clamour of furious verbosity, Ada enlightened her husband
on other points of Emma's behaviour. It was a long story, gathered, in
the last few minutes, partly from the culprit herself, partly from her
fellow-servants. Emma had got into the clutches of a jewellery
tallyman, one of the fellows who sell trinkets to servant-girls on the
pay-by-instalment system. She had made several purchases of gewgaws, and
had already paid three or four times their value, but was still in debt
to the tallyman, who threatened all manner of impossible proceedings
if she did not make up her arrears. Bottomless ignorance and imbecile
vanity had been the girl's ruin, aided by a grave indiscretion on
Peachey's part, of which he was to hear presently.

Some one must go to the police-station and make a formal charge. Ada
would undertake this duty with pious eagerness, enjoying it all the more
because of loud wailings and entreaties which the girl now addressed to
her master. Peachey looked at his sisters-in-law, and in neither face
perceived a compassionate softening. Fanny stood by as at a spectacle
provided for her amusement, without rancour, but equally without pity.
Beatrice was contemptuous. What right, said her countenance, had a
servant-girl to covet jewellery? And how pitiable the spirit that
prompted to a filching of half-crowns! For the criminals of finance, who
devastate a thousand homes, Miss French had no small admiration; crimes
such as the present were mean and dirty.

Ada reappeared, hurriedly clad for going forth; but no one had fetched a
cab. Incensed, she ordered her husband to do so.

'Who are you speaking to?' he replied wrathfully. 'I am not your
servant.'

Fanny laughed. The policeman, professionally calm, averted a smiling
face.

'It's nothing to me,' said Mrs. Peachey. 'I'm quite willing to walk.
Come along, constable.'

Her husband interposed.

'The girl doesn't go from my house until she's properly dressed.' He
turned to the other servants. 'Please to blow the whistle at the door,
or get a cab somehow. Emma, go upstairs and put your things on.'

'It was about time you behaved like a man,' fell quietly from Beatrice.

'You're right.' He looked sternly at the speaker. 'It _is_ time, and
that you shall all know.'

The culprit, suddenly silent, obeyed his order. The constable went
out at the front door, and there waited whilst a cab-summoning whistle
shrilled along De Crespigny Park.

Ada had ascended to the first landing, to make sure that the culprit did
not escape her. Beatrice and Fanny retired into the drawing-room.
After a lapse of some ten minutes two cabs rattled up to the door
from opposite directions, each driver lashing his horse to gain the
advantage. So nearly were they matched, that with difficulty the
vehicles avoided a collision. The man who had secured a place
immediately in front of the doorsteps, waved his whip and uttered a
shout of insulting triumph; his rival answered with volleys of abuse,
and drove round as if meditating an assault; it was necessary for the
policeman to interfere. Whereupon the defeated competitor vowed that
it was sanguinary hard lines; that for the sanguinary whole of this
sanguinary day had he waited vainly for a sanguinary fare, and but for a
sanguinary stumble of his sanguinary horse--

Tired of waiting, and suspicious of the delay, Ada went up to the room
where the servant was supposed to be making ready. It was a little room,
which served as night-nursery; by the girl's bed stood a cot occupied by
the child. Ada, exclaiming 'Now, come along!' opened the door violently.
A candle was burning; the boy, awake but silent, sat up in his cot, and
looked about with sleepy, yet frightened eyes.

'Where are you?'

Emma could not be seen. Astonished and enraged, Ada rushed forward; she
found the girl lying on the floor, and after bending over her, started
back with a cry half of alarm, half of disgust.

'Come up here at once!' she screamed down the staircase. 'Come up! The
wretch has cut her throat!'

There was a rush of feet. Peachey, the first to enter, saw a gash on the
neck of the insensible girl; in her hand she held a pair of scissors.

'I hope you're satisfied,' he said to his wife.

The police-officer, animated by a brisk succession of events such as he
could not hope for every day, raised the prostrate figure, and speedily
announced that the wound was not mortal.

'She's fainted, that's all. Tried to do for herself with them scissors,
and didn't know the way to go about it. We'll get her off sharp to the
surgeon.'

'It'll be attempted suicide, now, as well as stealing,' cried Ada.

Terrified by the crowd of noisy people, the child began to cry loudly.
Peachey lifted him out of the cot, wrapped a blanket about him, and
carried him down to his own bedroom. There, heedless of what was going
on above, he tried to soothe the little fellow, lavishing caresses and
tender words.

'My little boy will be good? He'll wait here, quietly, till father comes
back? Only a few minutes, and father will come back, and sit by him.
Yes--he shall sleep here, all night--'

Ada burst into the room.

'I should think you'd better go and look after your dear Emma. As if I
didn't know what's been going on! It's all come out, so you needn't tell
me any lies. You've been giving her money. The other servants knew of
it; she confessed it herself. Oh, you're a nice sort of man, you are!
Men of your sort are always good at preaching to other people. You've
given her money--what does _that_ mean? I suspected it all along. You
wouldn't have her sent away; oh no! She was so good to the child--and so
good to somebody else! A dirty servant! I'd choose some one better than
that, if I was a man. How much has she cost you? As much, no doubt, as
one of the swell women in Piccadilly Circus--'

Peachey turned upon her, the sweat beading on his ghastly face.

'Go!--Out of this room--or by God I shall do something fearful!--Out!'

She backed before him. He seized her by the shoulders, and flung her
forth, then locked the door. From without she railed at him in the
language of the gutter and the brothel. Presently her shouts were
mingled with piercing shrieks; they came from the would-be-suicide, who,
restored to consciousness, was being carried down for removal in the
cab. Peachey, looking and feeling like a man whom passion had brought
within sight of murder, stopped his ears and huddled himself against the
bedside. The child screamed in terror.

At length came silence. Peachey opened the door, and listened. Below,
voices sounded in quiet conversation.

'Who is down there?' he called.

'All of us except Ada,' replied Beatrice. 'The policeman said she
needn't go unless she liked, but she _did_ like.'

'Very well.'

He ran up to the deserted bedroom, carefully gathered together his
child's day-garments, and brought them down. Then, as well as he could,
he dressed the boy.

'Is it time to get up?' inquired the little three-year-old, astonished
at all that was happening, but soothed and amused by the thought that
his father had turned nurse. 'It isn't light yet.'

'You are going somewhere with father, dear. Somewhere nice.'

The dialogue between them, in sweet broken words such as the child had
not yet outgrown, and the parent did not wish to abandon for common
speech, went on until the dressing was completed.

'Now, will my boy show me where his clothes are for going out? His cap,
and his coat--'

Oh yes, they were up in the nursery; boy would show father--and laughed
merrily that he knew something father didn't. A few minutes more, and
the equipment was completed.

'Now wait for me here--only a minute. My boy won't cry, if I leave him
for a minute?'

'Cry! of course not!' Peachey descended to the drawing-room, closed the
door behind him, and stood facing his sisters-in-law.

'I want to tell you that I am going away, and taking the child with me.
Ada needn't expect me back to-night--nor ever. As long as I live I will
never again be under the same roof with her. You, Beatrice, said it was
about time I behaved like a man. You were right. I've put up long enough
with things such as no man ought to endure for a day. Tell your sister
that she may go on living here, if she chooses, for another six
months, to the end of the year--not longer. She shall be supplied with
sufficient money. After Christmas she may find a home for herself where
she likes; money will be paid to her through a lawyer, but from this
day I will neither speak nor write to her. You two must make your own
arrangements; you have means enough. You know very well, both of you,
why I am taking this step; think and say about me what you like. I have
no time to talk, and so I bid you good-bye.'

They did not seek to detain him, but stood mute whilst he left the room.

The little boy, timid and impatient, was at the head of the stairs. His
father enveloped him warmly in a shawl, and so they went forth. It was
not long before they met with a vacant cab. Half-an-hour's drive brought
them to the eating-house where Peachey had had his chop that evening,
and here he obtained a bedroom for the night.

By eleven o'clock the child slept peacefully. The father, seated at a
table, was engaged in writing to a solicitor.

At midnight he lay softly down by the child's side, and there, until
dawn, listened to the low breathing of his innocent little bedfellow.
Though he could not sleep, it was joy, rather than any painful
excitement, that kept him wakeful. A great and loathsome burden had
fallen from him, and in the same moment he had rescued his boy out of
an atmosphere of hated impurity. At length he could respect himself,
and for the first time in four long years he looked to the future with
tranquil hope.

Careless of the frank curiosity with which the people of the house
regarded him, he went down at seven o'clock, and asked for a railway
time-table. Having found a convenient train to Canterbury, he ordered
breakfast for himself and the child to be laid in a private room. It was
a merry meal. Sunshine of midsummer fell warm and bright upon the table;
the street below was so full of busy life that the little boy must needs
have his breakfast by the window, where he could eat and look forth at
the same time. No such delightful holiday had he ever enjoyed. Alone
with father, and going away by train into wonderful new worlds.

'Is Emma coming?' he asked.

It was significant that he did not speak of his mother.

They drove to the railway station, Peachey no less excited than the
child. From here he despatched a telegram to his partners, saying that
he should be absent for a day or two.

Then the train, struggling slowly out of London's welter, through the
newest outposts of gloom and grime, bore them, hearts companioned
in love and blamelessness, to the broad sunny meadows and the sweet
hop-gardens of Kent.



CHAPTER 5



'Serves her jolly well right,' said Beatrice.

'A lot _she'll_ care,' said Fanny. 'I should think myself precious
lucky. She gets rid of him, and of the kid too, and has as much as she
wants to live on. It's better than she deserves.--Do you believe he's
been carrying on with that girl?'

Miss. French laughed contemptuously.

'Not he!'

'Well, there's been a jolly good row to-night, if we never see another.
We shall all be in the papers!' The prospect had charms for Fanny. 'What
are you going to do? Live here till Christmas?'

Beatrice was quietly reviewing the situation. She kept silence, and her
sister also became meditative. Suddenly Fanny inquired:

'What sort of a place is Brussels?'

'Brussels? Why? I know nothing about it. Not much of a place, I think;
sprouts come from there, don't they?'

'It's a big town,' said the other, 'and a lively sort of place, they
say.

'Why do you ask me, if you know? What about it?'

As usual when performing the operation which, in her, answered to
thought, Fanny shuffled with her hands on her waist. At a distance from
Beatrice she stood still, and said:

'Some one I know is going there. I've a good mind to go too. I want to
see abroad.'

Her sister asked several searching questions, but Fanny would not make
known whether the friend was male or female.

'I shouldn't be much surprised,' remarked the woman of business,
indifferently, 'if you go and make a fool of yourself before long. That
Mrs. Damerel is up to some game with you; any one could see it with half
an eye. I suppose it isn't Lord that's going to Brussels?'

Fanny sputtered her disdain.

'If you had any common sense,' pursued her sister, 'you'd stick to him;
but you haven't. Oh yes, you think you can do better. Very well, we
shall see. If you find yourself in a hole one of these days, don't
expect _me_ to pull you out. I wouldn't give you a penny to save you
from the workhouse.'

'Wait till you're asked. I know where all _your_ money 'll go to. And
that's into Crewe's pocket. He'll fool you out of all you have.'

Beatrice reddened with wrath. But, unlike the other members of her
family, she could command her tongue. Fanny found it impossible to draw
another word from her.

On returning from the police-station, haggard and faint with excitement,
but supported by the anticipation of fresh attacks upon her husband,
Ada immediately learnt what had happened. For the first moment she
could hardly believe it. She rushed upstairs, and saw that the child
was really gone; then a blind frenzy took hold upon her. Alarming and
inexplicable sounds drew her sisters from below; they found her,
armed with something heavy, smashing every breakable object in her
bedroom--mirrors, toilet-ware, pictures, chimney-piece ornaments.

'She's gone mad!' shrieked Fanny. 'She'll kill us!'

'That beast shall pay for it!' yelled Ada, with a frantic blow at the
dressing-table.

Wanton destruction of property revolted all Beatrice's instincts.
Courageous enough, she sprang upon the wild animal, and flung her down.

Now indeed the last trace of veneer was gone, the last rag of
pseudo-civilisation was rent off these young women; in physical
conflict, vilifying each other like the female spawn of Whitechapel,
they revealed themselves as born--raw material which the mill of
education is supposed to convert into middle-class ladyhood. As a result
of being held still by superior strength Ada fell into convulsions,
foamed at the mouth, her eyes starting from their sockets; then she lay
as one dead.

'You've killed her,' cried the terrified Fanny.

'No fear. Give me some water to pitch over her.'

With a full jug from another bedroom, she drenched the prostrate figure.
When Ada came round she was powerless; even her rancorous lips could
utter only a sound of moaning. The sisters stripped her stark naked on
the floor, made a show of drying her with towels, and tumbled her into
bed. Then Beatrice brewed a great jorum of hot whisky-punch, and after
drinking freely to steady her shaken nerves, poured a pint or so down
Mrs. Peachey's throat.

'There won't be a funeral just yet,' she remarked, with a laugh. 'Now
we'll have supper; I feel hungry.'

They went to bed at something after midnight. The servants, having
stolen a bottle of spirits from the cupboard, which Beatrice left open,
both got drunk, and slept till morning upon the kitchen-floor.

On the morrow, Miss. French, attired as a walking advertisement of the
South London Fashionable Dress Supply Association, betook herself to
Farringdon Street for an interview with her commercial friend. Crewe was
absent, but one of three clerks, who occupied his largest room, informed
her that it could not be very long before he returned, and being
so familiar a figure here, she was permitted to wait in the agent's
sanctum. When the door closed upon her, the three young men discussed
her character with sprightly freedom. Beatrice, the while, splendidly
indifferent to the remarks she could easily divine, made a rapid
examination of loose papers lying on Crewe's desk, read several letters,
opened several books, and found nothing that interested her until,
on turning over a slip of paper with pencilled figures upon it, she
discovered a hotel-bill, the heading: Royal Hotel, Falmouth. It was for
a day and night's entertainment, the debtor 'Mr. Crewe,' the date less
than a week gone by. This document she considered attentively, her brows
knitted, her eyes wide. But a sound caused her to drop it upon the desk
again. Another moment, and Crewe entered.

He looked keenly at her, and less good-humouredly than of wont. These
persons never shook hands, and indeed dispensed, as a rule, with all
forms of civility.

'What are you staring at?' asked Crewe bluffly.

'What are _you_ staring at?'

'Nothing, that I know.' He hung up his hat, and sat down. 'I've a note
to write; wait a minute.'

The note written, and given to a clerk, Crewe seemed to recover
equanimity. His visitor told him all that happened in De Crespigny Park,
even to the crudest details, and they laughed together uproariously.

'I'm going to take a flat,' Beatrice then informed him. 'Just find me
something convenient and moderate, will you? A bachelor's flat.'

'What about Fanny?'

'She has something on; I don't know what it is. Talks about going to
Brussels--with a friend.'

Crewe looked astonished.

'You ought to see after her. I know what the end 'll be. Brussels? I've
heard of English girls going there, but they don't usually come back.'

'What can I do? I'm pretty certain that Damerel woman has a game on
hand. She doesn't want Fanny to marry her nephew--if Lord _is_ her
nephew. She wants his money, that's my idea.'

'Mine, too,' remarked the other quietly. 'Look here, old chap, it's your
duty to look after your little damned fool of a sister; I tell you that
plainly. I shan't think well of you if you don't.'

Beatrice displayed eagerness to defend herself. She had done her best;
Fanny scorned all advice, and could not be held against her will.

'Has she given up all thought of Lord?'

'I'm not sure, but I think so. And it looks as if he was going his own
way, and didn't care much. He never writes to her now. Of course it's
that woman's doing.'

Crewe reflected.

'I shall have to look into Mrs. Damerel's affairs. Might be worth while.
Where is she living?' He made a note of the information. 'Well, anything
else to tell me?'

Beatrice spoke of business matters, then asked him if he had been out
of town lately. The question sounded rather abrupt, and caused Crewe to
regard her with an expression she privately interpreted.

'A few short runs. Nowhere particular.'

'Oh?--Not been down into Cornwall?'

He lost his temper.

'What are you after? What business is it of yours? If you're going
to spy on me, I'll soon let you know that I won't stand that kind of
thing.'

'Don't disturb yourself,' said Beatrice, with a cold smile. 'I haven't
been spying, and you can go where you like for anything I care. I
guessed you _had_ been down there, that's all.'

Crewe kept silence, his look betraying uneasiness as well as anger.
Speaking at length, he fixed her with keen eyes.

'If it's any satisfaction to you, you're welcome to know that I have
been into Cornwall--and to Falmouth.'

Beatrice merely nodded, and still he searched her face.

'Just answer me a plain question, old chap. Come, there's no nonsense
between us; we know each other--eh?'

'Oh yes, we know each other,' Miss. French answered, her lips puckering
a little.

'What do you know about _her_? What has she been doing all this time?'

Beatrice laughed.

'I know just as little about her as I care.'

'You care a good deal more than you'll confess. I wouldn't be up to
women's tricks, if I were you.'

She revolted.

'After all, I suppose I _am_ a woman?'

'Well, I suppose so.' Crewe grinned good-naturedly. 'But that isn't
in the terms of our partnership, you remember. You can be a reasonable
fellow enough, when you like. Just tell me the truth. What do you know
about Nancy Lord?' Beatrice assumed an air of mystery.

'I'll tell you that, if you tell me what it is you want of her. Is it
her money?'

'Her money be damned!'

'It's herself, then.'

'And what if it is? What have _you_ to say to it?'

Her eyes fell, and she muttered 'Nothing.'

'Just bear that in mind, then. And now that I've answered your question,
answer mine. What have you heard about her? Or what have you found out?'

She raised her eyes again and again, but in a mocking voice said,
'Nothing.'

'You're telling me a lie.'

'You're a brute to say so!'

They exchanged fierce glances, but could not meet each other's eyes
steadily. Crewe, mastering his irritation, said with a careless laugh:

'All right, I believe you. Didn't mean to offend you, old chap.'

'I won't be called that!' She was trembling with stormy emotions. 'You
shall treat me decently.'

'Very well. Old girl, then.'

'I'm a good deal younger than you are. And I'm a good deal better than
you, in every way. I'm a lady, at all events, and you can't pretend to
be a gentleman. You're a rough, common fellow--'

'Holloa! Holloa! Draw it mild.'

He was startled, and in some degree abashed; his eyes, travelling to
the door, indicated a fear that this singular business-colloquy might be
overheard. But Beatrice went on, without subduing her voice, and, having
delivered herself of much plain language, walked from the room, leaving
the door open behind her.

As a rule, she returned from her day's occupations to dinner, in
De Crespigny Park, at seven o'clock. To-day her arrival at home
was considerably later. About three o'clock she made a call at the
boarding-house where Mrs. Damerel lived, but was disappointed in her
wish to see that lady, who would not be in before the hour of
dining. She called again at seven, and Mrs. Damerel received her very
graciously. It was the first time they had met. Beatrice, in no mood for
polite grimaces, at once disclosed the object of her visit; she wanted
to talk about Fanny; did Mrs. Damerel know anything of a proposed
journey to Brussels? The lady professed utter ignorance of any such
intention on Fanny's part. She had not seen Fanny for at least a
fortnight.

'How can that be? She told me she dined here last Sunday.'

'That's very strange,' answered Mrs. Damerel, with suave concern. 'She
certainly did not dine here.'

'And the Sunday before?'

'Your sister has dined here only once, Miss. French, and that was three
months ago.'

'Then I don't understand it. Haven't you been taking her to theatres,
and parties, and that kind of thing?'

'I have taken her once to a theatre, and twice to evening "at homes."
The last time we were together anywhere was at Mrs. Dane's, about the
middle of May. Since then I have seen her hardly at all. I'm very
much afraid you are under some misconception. Thinking your sister was
engaged to marry my nephew, Mr. Lord, I naturally desired to offer her
a few friendly attentions. But it came out, at length, that she did not
regard the engagement as serious. I was obliged to speak gravely to my
young nephew, and beg him to consider his position. There is the second
dinner-bell, but I am quite at your service, Miss. French, if you wish
to question me further.'

Beatrice was much inclined to resent this tone, and to use her
vernacular. But it seemed only too probable that Fanny had been
deceiving her, and, as she really feared for the girl's safety, prudence
bade her be civil with Mrs. Damerel.

'Can't you help me to find out what Fanny has really been doing?'

'I'm afraid it's quite out of my power. She never confided in me, and it
is so long since I have seen anything of her at all.'

'It's best to speak plainly,' said Beatrice, in her business tone.
'Can't you think of any man, in the society you introduced her to, who
may be trying to lead her astray?'

'Really, Miss. French! The society in which I move is not what you seem
to suppose. If your sister is in any danger of _that_ kind, you must
make your inquiries elsewhere--in an inferior rank of life.'

Beatrice no longer contained herself.

'Perhaps I know rather more than you think about your kind of society.
There's not much to choose between the men and the women.'

'Miss. French, I believe you reside in a part of London called
Camberwell. And I believe you are engaged in some kind of millinery
business. This excuses you for ill-manners. All the same, I must beg you
to relieve me of your presence.' She rang the bell. 'Good evening.'

'I dare say we shall see each other again,' replied Beatrice, with an
insulting laugh. 'I heard some one say to-day that it might be as well
to find out _who you really are_. And if any harm comes to Fanny, I
shall take a little trouble about that inquiry myself.'

Mrs. Damerel changed colour, but no movement betrayed anxiety. In the
attitude of dignified disdain, she kept her eyes on a point above Miss.
French's head, and stood so until the plebeian adversary had withdrawn.

Then she sat down, and for a few minutes communed with herself. In the
end, instead of going to dinner, she rang her bell again. A servant
appeared.

'Is Mr. Mankelow in the dining-room?'

'Yes, ma'am.'

'Ask him to be kind enough to come here for a moment.'

With little delay, Mr. Mankelow answered the summons which called him
from his soup. He wore evening dress; his thin hair was parted down the
middle; his smooth-shaven and rather florid face expressed the annoyance
of a hungry man at so unseasonable an interruption.

'Do forgive me,' began Mrs. Damerel, in a pathetic falsetto. 'I have
been so upset, I felt obliged to seek advice immediately, and no one
seemed so likely to be of help to me as you--a man of the world. Would
you believe that a sister of that silly little Miss. French has just
been here--a downright virago--declaring that the girl has been
led astray, and that I am responsible for it? Can you imagine such
impertinence? She has fibbed shockingly to the people at home--told
them she was constantly here with me in the evenings, when she must have
been--who knows where. It will teach me to meddle again with girls of
that class.'

Mankelow stood with his hands behind him, and legs apart, regarding the
speaker with a comically puzzled air.

'My dear Mrs. Damerel,'--he had a thick, military sort of voice,--'why
in the world should this interpose between us and dinner? Afterwards, we
might--'

'But I am really anxious about the silly little creature. It would be
extremely disagreeable if my name got mixed up in a scandal of any
kind. You remember my telling you that she didn't belong exactly to
the working-class. She has even a little property of her own; and I
shouldn't wonder if she has friends who might make a disturbance if
her--her vagaries could be in any way connected with me and my circle.
Something was mentioned about Brussels. She has been chattering about
some one who wanted to take her to Brussels--'

The listener arched his eyebrows more and more.

'What _can_ it matter to you?'

'To be sure, I have no acquaintance with any one who could do such
things--'

'Why, of course not. And even if you had, I understand that the girl is
long out of her teens--'

'Long since.'

'Then it's her own affair--and that of the man who cares to purchase
such amusement. By-the-bye, it happens rather oddly that I myself have
to run over to Brussels on business; but I trust'--he laughed--'that my
years and my character--'

'Oh, Mr. Mankelow, absurd! It's probably some commercial traveller, or
man of that sort, don't you think? The one thing I _do_ hope is, that,
if anything like this happens, the girl will somehow make it clear to
her friends that _I_ had no knowledge whatever of what was going on. But
that can hardly be hoped, I fear!--'

Their eyes crossed; they stood for a moment perusing vacancy.

'Yes, I think it might be hoped,' said Mankelow airily. 'She seemed to
me a rather reckless sort of young person. It's highly probable she will
write letters which release every one but herself from responsibility.
In fact'--he gazed at her with a cynical smile--'my knowledge of human
nature disposes me to assure you that she certainly will. She might
even, I should say, write a letter to _you_--perhaps a cheeky sort of
letter, which would at once set your mind at ease.'

'Oh, if you really take that view--'

'I do indeed. Don't you think we might dismiss the matter, and dine?'

They did so.

Until noon of to-day, Mrs. Peachey had kept her bed, lying amid the
wreck wrought by last night's madness. She then felt well enough to
rise, and after refreshment betook herself by cab to the offices of
Messrs Ducker, Blunt & Co., manufacturers of disinfectants, where she
conversed with one of the partners, and learnt that her husband had
telegraphed his intention to be absent for a day or two. Having, with
the self-respect which distinguished her, related her story from the
most calumnious point of view, she went home again to nurse her headache
and quarrel with Fanny. But Fanny had in the meantime left home,
and, unaccountable fact, had taken with her a large tin box and a
dress-basket; heavily packed, said the servants. Her direction to the
cabman was merely Westminster Bridge, which conveyed to Mrs. Peachey no
sort of suggestion.

When Beatrice came back, and learnt this event, she went apart in
wrathful gloom. Ada could not engage her in a quarrel. It was a
wretchedly dull evening.

They talked next morning, and Beatrice announced her purpose of going
to live by herself as soon as possible. But she would not quarrel. Left
alone, Ada prepared to visit certain of their relatives in different
parts of London, to spread among them the news of her husband's infamy.



CHAPTER 6



When Mary Woodruff unlocked the house-door and entered the little hall,
it smelt and felt as though the damp and sooty fogs of winter still
lingered here, untouched by the July warmth. She came alone, and
straightway spent several hours in characteristic activity--airing,
cleaning, brightening. For a few days there would be no servant; Mary,
after her long leisure down in Cornwall, enjoyed the prospect of doing
all the work herself. They had reached London last evening, and had
slept at a family hotel, where Nancy remained until the house was in
order for her.

Unhappily, their arrival timed with a change of weather, which brought
clouds and rain. The glories of an unshadowed sky would have little
more than availed to support Nancy's courage as she passed the creaking
little gate and touched the threshold of a home to which she returned
only on compulsion; gloom overhead, and puddles underfoot, tried her
spirit sorely. She had a pale face, and thin cheeks, and moved with
languid step.

Her first glance was at the letter-box.

'Nothing?'

Mary shook her head. During their absence letters had been re-addressed
by the post-office, and since the notice of return nothing had come.

'I'm quite sure a letter has been lost.'

'Yes, it may have been. But there'll be an answer to your last very
soon.'

'I don't think so. Most likely I shall never hear again.'

And Nancy sat by the window of the front room, looking, as she had
looked so many a time, at the lime tree opposite and the house visible
through wet branches. A view unchanged since she could remember;
recalling all her old ambitions, revolts, pretences, and ignorances;
recalling her father, who from his grave still oppressed her living
heart.

Somewhere near sounded the wailing shout of a dustman. It was like the
voice of a soul condemned to purge itself in filth.

'Mary!' She rose up and went to the kitchen. 'I can't live here! It will
kill me if I have to live in this dreadful place. Why, even you have
been crying; I can see you have. If _you_ give way, think what it must
be to me!'

'It's only for a day or two, dear,' answered Mary. 'We shall feel at
home again very soon. Miss. Morgan will come this evening, and perhaps
your brother.'

'I must do something. Give me some work.'

Mary could not but regard this as a healthy symptom, and she suggested
tasks that called for moderate effort. Sick of reading--she had read
through a whole circulating library in the past six months--Nancy
bestirred herself about the house; but she avoided her father's room.

Horace did not come to-day; a note arrived from him, saying that he
would call early to-morrow morning. But at tea-time Jessica presented
herself. She looked less ghostly than half a year ago; the grave
illness through which she had passed seemed to have been helpful to her
constitution. Yet she was noticeably changed. In her letters Nancy had
remarked an excessive simplicity, a sort of childishness, very unlike
Jessica's previous way of writing; and the same peculiarity now appeared
in her conversation. By turns she was mawkish and sprightly, tearful
and giggling. Her dress, formerly neglected to the point of untidiness,
betrayed a new-born taste for fashionable equipment; she suddenly drew
attention to it in the midst of serious talk, asking with a bashful
smirk whether Nancy thought it suited her.

'I got it at Miss. French's place--the Association, you know. It's
really wonderful how cheap things are there. And the very best cut, by
dressmakers from Paris.'

Nancy wondered, and felt that her diminishing regard for Miss. Morgan
had suffered a fresh blow.

There was much news to receive and impart. In writing from Falmouth,
Nancy had referred to the details of her own life with studied
ambiguity. She regretted having taken Jessica into her confidence, and
avoided penning a word which, if read by any one but her correspondent,
would betray the perilous secret. Jessica, after her illness, was
inclined to resent this extreme caution, which irritated her curiosity;
but in vain she assured Nancy that there was not the least fear of her
letters falling into wrong hands. For weeks at a time she heard nothing,
and then would come a letter, long indeed, but without a syllable of the
information she desired. Near the end of May she received a line or two,
'I have been really ill, but am now much better. I shall stay here only
a few weeks more. Don't be anxious; I am well cared for, and the worst
is over.'

She heard the interpretation from Nancy's lips, and laughed and cried
over it.

'What you must have suffered, my poor dear! And to be separated from the
little darling! Oh, it's too cruel! You are sure they will be kind to
it?'

'Mary has every confidence in the woman. And I like the look of her; I
don't feel uneasy. I shall go there very often, of course.'

'And when is _he_ coming back? He oughtn't to have kept away all this
time. How unkind!'

'Not at all,' Nancy replied, with sudden reserve. 'He is acting for the
best. You mustn't ask me about that; you shall know more some day.'

Jessica, whose face made legible presentment of her every thought,
looked disappointed and peevish.

'And you are really going in for the examination again?' Nancy asked.

'Oh, of course I am!' answered the other perkily; 'but not till summer
of next year. I'm not allowed to study much yet; the doctor says I might
do my brain a serious injury. I read a great deal; books that rest the
mind--poetry and fiction; of course only the very best fiction. I shall
soon be able to begin teaching again; but I must be very careful. Only
an hour or two a day at first, and perhaps quite young children.'

Evidently the girl felt a certain pride in what she had undergone. Her
failure to matriculate was forgotten in the sense that she offered
a most interesting case of breakdown from undue mental exertion.
The doctor had declared his astonishment that she held up until the
examination was over.

'He simply wouldn't believe me when I told him the hours I worked. He
said I ought to be on my trial for attempted suicide!'

And she laughed with extravagant conceit.

'You have quite made friends with the Barmbys,' said Nancy, eyeing her
curiously.

'They are very nice people. Of course the girls quite understand what a
difference there is between themselves and me. I like them because they
are so modest; they would never think of contradicting my opinion about
anything.'

'And what about the Prophet?'

'I don't think you ever quite understood him,' Jessica replied, with an
obvious confusion which perplexed her friend. 'He isn't at all the kind
of man you thought.'

'No doubt I was wrong,' Nancy hastened to say. 'It was prejudice.
And you remember that I never had any fault to find with his--his
character.'

'You disliked him,' said the other sharply. 'And you still dislike him.
I'm sure you do.'

So plainly did Jessica desire a confirmation of this statement, that
Nancy allowed herself to be drawn into half avowing a positive dislike
for Samuel. Whereupon Jessica looked pleased, and tossed her head in a
singular way.

'I needn't remind you,' fell from Nancy, after a moment of troubled
reflection, 'how careful you must be in talking about me to the
Barmbys.'

'Oh, don't have the slightest fear.'

'Weren't you delirious in your illness?'

'I should think I was indeed! For a long time.'

'I hope you said nothing--'

'About you? Oh, not a word; I'm quite sure. I talked all the time about
my studies. The doctor heard me one day repeating a long bit of Virgil.
And I kept calling for bits of paper to work out problems in Geometrical
Progression. Just fancy! I don't think most girls are delirious in that
way. If I had said anything about you that sounded queer, of course
mother would have told me afterwards. Oh, it was quite an intellectual
delirium.'

Had Jessica, since her illness, become an insufferable simpleton?
or--Nancy wondered--was it she herself who, through experience and
sorrows, was grown wiser, and saw her friend in a new light? It troubled
her gravely that the preservation of a secret more than ever momentous
should depend upon a person with so little sense. The girl's departure
was a relief; but in the silence that followed upon silly talk, she had
leisure to contemplate this risk, hitherto scarce taken into account.
She spoke of it with Mary, the one friend to whom her heart went out
in absolute trust, from whom she concealed but few of her thoughts, and
whose moral worth, only understood since circumstances compelled her
reliance upon it, had set before her a new ideal of life. Mary, she well
knew, abhorred the deceit they were practising, and thought hard things
of the man who made it a necessity; so it did not surprise her that the
devoted woman showed no deep concern at a new danger.

'It's more the shame than anything else, that I fear now,' said Nancy.
'If I have to support myself and my child, I shall do it. How, I don't
know; but other women find a way, and I should. If he deserts me, I am
not such a poor creature as to grieve on that account; I should despise
him too much even to hate him. But the shame of it would be
terrible. It's common, vulgar cheating--such as you read of in the
newspapers--such as people are punished for. I never thought of it in
that way when he was here. Yet he felt it. He spoke of it like that, but
I wouldn't listen.'

Mary heard this with interest.

'Did he wish you to give it up?' she asked. 'You never told me that.'

'He said he would rather we did. But that was when he had never thought
of being in want himself. Afterwards--yes, even then he spoke in the
same way; but what could we do?'

'Don't fear that he will forsake you,' said Mary. 'You will hear from
him very soon. He knows the right and the wrong, and right will be
stronger with him in the end.'

'If only I were sure that he has heard of his child's birth. If he
_has_, and won't even write to me, then he is no man, and it's better we
should never see each other again.'

She knew the hours of postal delivery, and listened with throbbing heart
to the double knocks at neighbouring houses. When the last postman was
gone by, she sat down, sick with disappointment.

At bedtime she said to Mary, 'My little baby is asleep; oh, if I could
but see it for a moment!' And tears choked her as she turned away.

It was more than two months since she had heard from her husband.

At first Tarrant wrote as frequently as he had promised. She learnt
speedily of his arrival at New York, then that he had reached Nassau,
the capital of the Bahamas, then that he was with his friend Sutherland
on the little island amid the coral reefs. Subsequent letters, written
in buoyant spirits, contained long descriptions of the scenery
about him, and of the life he led. He expressed a firm confidence in
Sutherland's enterprises; beyond a doubt, there was no end of money to
be made by an energetic man; he should report most favourably to Mr.
Vawdrey, whose co-operation would of course be invaluable. For his own
part, whether he profited or not from these commercial schemes, he had
not been mistaken in foreseeing material for journalism, even for a
book. Yes, he should certainly write a book on the Bahamas, if only to
expose the monstrous system of misgovernment which accounted for the
sterility into which these islands had fallen. The climate, in winter
at all events, was superb. Sutherland and he lay about in delicious
sunshine, under a marvellous sky, smoking excellent cigars, and talking
over old Oxford days. He quoted Tennyson: 'Larger constellations
burning,' &c.

At the end of December, when Nancy, according to their agreement, began
to hope for his return, a letter in a very different tone burdened
her with dismal doubts. Tarrant had quarrelled with his friend. He had
discovered that Sutherland was little better than a swindler. 'I see
that the fellow's professed energy was all sham. He is the laziest scamp
imaginable; lazier even than his boozing old father. He schemes only to
get money out of people; and his disappointment on finding that _I_ have
no money to lose, has shown itself at length in very gross forms. I find
he is a gambler; there has just been a tremendous row between him and an
American, whom he is said to have cheated at cards. Last year he was for
several weeks in Mexico City, a place notorious for gambling, and there
lost a large sum of money that didn't belong to him.' The upshot was
that he could no longer advise Mr. Vawdrey to have anything to do with
Sutherland. But he must not leave the Bahamas yet; that would be most
unwise, as he was daily gathering most valuable information. Vawdrey
might be induced to lend him a hundred pounds or so. But he would write
again very soon.

It was the close of January when he dated his next letter. Vawdrey had
sent him fifty pounds; this, however, was to include the cost of his
return to England. 'See, then, what I have decided. I shall make a
hurried tour through the West Indian Islands, then cross to the States,
and travel by land to New York or Boston, seeing all I can afford to
on the way. If I have to come home as a steerage passenger, never
mind; that, too, will be valuable experience.' There followed many
affectionate phrases, but Nancy's heart remained cold.

He wrote next from Washington, after six weeks' silence. Difficulties
of which he would speak at length in another letter had caused him to
postpone answering the two letters he had received. Nancy must never
lose faith in him; his love was unshaken; before the birth of her child
he would assuredly be back in England. Let her address to New York. He
was well, but could not pretend to be very cheerful. However, courage!
He had plans and hopes, of which she should soon hear.

After that, Nancy knew nothing of him, save that he was living in New
York. He wrote two or three times, but briefly, always promising
details in the next epistle. Then he ceased to correspond. Not even
the announcement of the child's birth elicited a word from him. One
subsequent letter had Nancy despatched; this unanswered, she would write
no more.

She was herself surprised at the calmness with which she faced so
dreadful a possibility as desertion by the man she had loved and
married, the father of her baby. It meant, perhaps, that she could not
believe such fate had really befallen her. Even in Tarrant's last short
letter sounded a note of kindness, of truthfulness, incompatible, it
seemed to her, with base cruelty. 'I dreamt of you last night, dearest,
and woke up with a heart that ached for your suffering.' How could a man
pen those words, and be meditating dastardly behaviour to the woman he
addressed? Was he ill, then? or had fatal accident befallen him? She
feared such explanation only in her weakest moments. If, long ago, he
could keep silence for six weeks at a time, why not now for months?
As for the news she had sent him--does a man think it important that a
little child has been born into the world? Likely enough that again he
merely 'postponed' writing. Of course he no longer loved her, say what
he might; at most he thought of her with a feeling of compassion--not
strong enough to overcome his dislike of exertion. He would come
back--when it pleased him.

