Nancy would not sully her mind by thinking that he might only return
when her position made it worth his while. He was not a man of that
stamp. Simply, he had ceased to care for her; and having no means of his
own, whilst she was abundantly provided, he yielded to the temptation
to hold aloof from a woman whose claim upon him grew burdensome. Her
thoughts admitted no worse accusation than this. Did any grave ill
befall her; if, for instance, the fact of her marriage became known, and
she were left helpless; her letter to New York would not be disregarded.
To reflect thus signified a mental balance rare in women, and remarkable
in one situated as Nancy was. She talked with her companion far less
consistently, for talk served to relieve the oppression of her heart and
mind.

When, next morning, Horace entered the sitting-room, brother and sister
viewed each other with surprise. Neither was prepared for the outward
change wrought in both by the past half-year. Nancy looked what she
in truth had become, a matronly young woman, in uncertain health, and
possessed by a view of life too grave for her years; Horace, no longer
a mere lad, exhibited in sunken cheeks and eyes bright with an unhappy
recklessness, the acquisition of experience which corrupts before it can
mature. Moving to offer her lips, Nancy was checked by the young man's
exclamation.

'What on earth has been the matter with you? I never saw any one so
altered.'

His voice, with its deepened note, and the modification of his very
accent, due to novel circumstances, checked the hearer's affectionate
impulse. If not unfeeling, the utterance had nothing fraternal. Deeply
pained, and no less alarmed by this warning of the curiosity her
appearance would excite in all who knew her, Nancy made a faltering
reply.

'Why should you seem astonished? You know very well I have had an
illness.'

'But what sort of illness? What caused it? You used always to be well
enough.'

'You had better go and talk to my medical attendant,' said Nancy, in a
cold, offended voice.

Horace resumed with irritability.

'Isn't it natural for me to ask such questions? You're not a bit like
yourself. And what did you mean by telling me you were coming back at
once, when I wanted to join you at Falmouth?'

'I meant to. But after all, I had to stay longer.'

'Oh well, it's nothing to me.'

They had not even shaken hands, and now felt no desire to correct the
omission, which was at first involuntary. Horace seemed to have lost all
the amiability of his nature; he looked about him with restless, excited
eyes.

'Are you in a hurry?' asked his sister, head erect.

'No hurry that I know of.--You haven't heard what's been going on?'

'Where?'

'Of course it won't interest you. There's something about you I can't
understand. Is it father's will that has spoilt your temper, and made
you behave so strangely?'

'It is not _my_ temper that's spoilt. And as for behaving strangely--.'
She made an effort to command herself. 'Sit down, Horace, and let me
know what is the matter with you. Why we should be unfriendly, I really
can't imagine. I have suffered from ill health, that's all. I'm sorry
I behaved in that way when you talked of coming to Falmouth; it wasn't
meant as you seem to think. Tell me what you have to tell.'

He could not take a reposeful attitude, but, after struggling with some
reluctance, began to explain the agitation that beset him.

'Mrs. Damerel has done something I didn't think any woman would be
capable of. For months she has been trying to ruin Fanny, and now it has
come--she has succeeded. She made no secret of wanting to break things
off between her and me, but I never thought her plotting could go as
far as this. Fanny has run away--gone to the Continent with a man Mrs.
Damerel introduced to her.'

'Perhaps they are married,' said Nancy, with singular impulsiveness.

'Of course they're not. It's a fellow I knew to be a scoundrel the first
time I set eyes on him. I warned Fanny against him, and I told Mrs.
Damerel that I should hold her responsible if any harm came of the
acquaintance she was encouraging between him and Fanny. She did
encourage it, though she pretended not to. Her aim was to separate me
and Fanny--she didn't care how.'

He spoke in a high, vehement note; his cheeks flushed violently, his
clenched fist quivered at his side.

'How do you know where she is gone?' Nancy asked.

'She as good as told her sister that she was going to Brussels with
some one. Then one day she disappeared, with her luggage. And that
fellow--Mankelow's his name--has gone too. He lived in the same
boarding-house with Mrs. Damerel.'

'That is all the evidence you have?'

'Quite enough,' he replied bitterly.

'It doesn't seem so to me. But suppose you're right, what proof have
you that Mrs. Damerel had anything to do with it? If she is our mother's
sister--and you say there can be no doubt of it--I won't believe that
she could carry out such a hateful plot as this.'

'What does it matter who she is? I would swear fifty times that she has
done it. You know very well, when you saw her, you disliked her at once.
You were right in that, and I was wrong.'

'I can't be sure. Perhaps it was she that disliked me, more than I did
her. For one thing, I don't believe that people make such plots. And
what plotting was needed? Couldn't any one have told you what a girl
like Fanny French would do if she lost her head among people of a higher
class?'

'Then Mrs. Damerel must have foreseen it. That's just what I say. She
pretended to be a friend to the girl, on purpose to ruin her.'

'Have you accused her of it?'

'Yes, I have.' His eyes flashed. Nancy marvelled at this fire,
drawn from a gentle nature by what seemed to her so inadequate, so
contemptible a cause. 'Of course she denied it, and got angry with me;
but any one could see she was glad of what had happened. There's an end
between us, at all events. I shall never go to see her again; she's
a woman who thinks of nothing but money and fashion. I dislike her
friends, every one of them I've met. I told her that what she had done
ought to be a punishable crime.'

Nancy reflected, then said quietly:

'Whether you are right or wrong, I don't think you would have got any
good from her. But will you tell me what you are going to do? I told you
that I thought borrowing money only to live on it in idleness was very
foolish.'

Her brother stiffened his neck.

'You must allow me to judge for myself.'

'But have you judged for yourself? Wasn't it by Mrs. Damerel's advice
that you gave up business?'

'Partly. But I should have done it in any case.'

'Have you any plans?'

'No, I haven't,' he answered. 'You can't expect a man to have plans
whose life has been thoroughly upset.'

Nancy, reminded of his youthfulness by the tone in which he called
himself a 'man,' experienced a revival of natural feeling. Though
revolting against the suggestion that a woman akin to them had been
guilty of what her brother believed, she was glad to think that Fanny
French had relinquished all legitimate claim upon him, and that his
connection with 'smart' society had come to an end. Obvious enough were
the perils of his situation, and she, as elder sister, recognised a duty
towards him; she softened her voice, and endeavoured to re-establish the
confidence of old time. Impossible at once, though with resolution she
might ultimately succeed. Horace, at present, was a mere compound of
agitated and inflamed senses. The life he had been leading appeared in
a vicious development of his previously harmless conceit and egoism.
All his characteristics had turned out, as it were, the seamy side; and
Nancy with difficulty preserved her patience as he showed point after
point of perverted disposition. The result of their talk was a careless
promise from Horace that he would come to Grove Lane not seldomer than
once a week.

He stayed only an hour, resisting Nancy's endeavour to detain him at
least for the mid-day meal. To Mary he spoke formally, awkwardly, as
though unable to accept her position in the house, and then made his
escape like one driven by an evil spirit.



CHAPTER 7



With the clearing of the sky, Nancy's spirit grew lighter. She went
about London, and enjoyed it after her long seclusion in the little
Cornish town; enjoyed, too, her release from manifold restraints and
perils. Her mental suffering had made the physical harder to bear; she
was now recovering health of mind and body, and found with surprise that
life had a new savour, independent of the timorous joy born with her
child. Strangely, as it seemed to her, she grew conscious of a personal
freedom not unlike what she had vainly desired in the days of petulant
girlhood; the sense came only at moments, but was real and precious;
under its influence she forgot everything abnormal in her situation,
and--though without recognising this significance--knew the exultation
of a woman who has justified her being.

A day or two of roaming at large gave her an appetite for activity.
Satisfied that her child was safe and well cared for, she turned her
eyes upon the life of the world, and wished to take some part in
it--not the part she had been wont to picture for herself before reality
supplanted dreams. Horace's example on the one hand, and that of Jessica
Morgan on the other, helped her to contemn mere social excitement and
the idle vanity which formerly she styled pursuit of culture. Must there
not be discoverable, in the world to which she had, or could obtain,
access, some honest, strenuous occupation, which would hold in check her
unprofitable thoughts and soothe her self-respect?

That her fraud, up to and beyond the crucial point, had escaped
detection, must be held so wonderful, that she felt justified in an
assurance of impunity. The narrowest escape of which she was aware had
befallen only a few weeks ago. On the sixth day after the birth of the
child, there was brought to her lodgings at Falmouth a note addressed to
'Miss. Lord.' Letters bearing this address had arrived frequently, and
by the people of the house were supposed to be for Mary Woodruff, who
went by the name of 'Miss. Lord,' Nancy having disguised herself as
'Mrs. Woodruff;' but they had always come by post, and the present
missive must be from some acquaintance actually in the town. Nancy could
not remember the handwriting. Breaking open the envelope as she lay
in bed, she saw with alarm the signature 'Luckworth Crewe.' He was at
Falmouth on business, Crewe wrote, and, before leaving London, he had
ventured to ask Miss Lord's address from her brother, whom he casually
met somewhere. Would Nancy allow him to see her, were it but for a
minute or two? Earnestly he besought this favour. He desired nothing
more than to see Miss. Lord, and to speak with her in the way of an
ordinary acquaintance. After all this time, she had, he felt sure,
forgiven his behaviour at their last meeting. Only five minutes of
conversation--

All seemed lost. Nancy was silent in despair. But Mary faced the
perilous juncture, and, to all appearances, averted catastrophe. She
dressed herself, and went straight to the hotel where Crewe had put
up, and where he awaited an answer. Having made known who she was, she
delivered a verbal message: Miss. Lord was not well enough to see any
one to-day, and, in any case, she could not have received Mr Crewe;
she begged him to pardon her; before long, they might perhaps meet
in London, but, for her own part, she wished Mr. Crewe would learn to
regard her as a stranger. Of course there followed a dialogue; and Mary,
seeming to speak with all freedom, convinced Crewe that his attempt
to gain an interview was quite hopeless. She gave him much information
concerning her mistress--none of it false, but all misleading--and in
the end had to resist an offer of gold coins, pressed upon her as a
bribe for her good word with Nancy.

The question was--had Crewe been content to leave Falmouth without
making inquiries of other people? To a man of his experience, nothing
was easier than such investigation. But, with other grounds of anxiety,
this had ceased to disturb Nancy's mind. Practically, she lived as
though all danger were at an end. The task immediately before her seemed
very simple; she had only to resume the old habits, and guard against
thoughtless self-betrayal in her everyday talk. The chance that any one
would discover her habit of visiting a certain house at the distance of
several miles from Camberwell, was too slight for consideration.

She wrote to Mr. Barmby, senior, informing him of her return, in
improved health, to Grove Lane, and thanking him once more for his
allowing her to make so long a stay in Cornwall. If he wished to see
her, she would be at home at any time convenient to him. In a few days
the old gentleman called, and for an hour or two discoursed well-meaning
commonplace. He was sorry to observe that she looked a trifle pale; in
the autumn she must go away again, and to a more bracing locality--he
would suggest Broadstairs, which had always exercised the most
beneficial effect upon his own health. Above all, he begged her to
refrain from excessive study, most deleterious to a female constitution.
Then he asked questions about Horace, and agreed with Nancy that the
young man ought to decide upon some new pursuit, if he had definitely
abandoned the old; lack of steady occupation was most deleterious at his
age. In short, Mr. Barmby rather apologised for his guardianship than
sought to make assertion of it; and Nancy, by a few feminine devices,
won a better opinion than she had hitherto enjoyed. On the day
following, Samuel Barmby and his sisters waited upon Miss. Lord; all
three were surprisingly solemn, and Samuel talked for the most part of a
'paragraph' he had recently read, which stated that the smoke of London,
if properly utilised, would be worth a vast sum of money. 'The English
are a wasteful people,' was his conclusion; to which Nancy assented with
a face as grave as his own.

Not a little to her astonishment, the next day brought her a long letter
in Samuel's fair commercial hand. It began by assuring her that the
writer had no intention whatever of troubling her with the renewal of
a suit so firmly rejected on more than one occasion; he wished only to
take this opportunity of her return from a long absence to express the
abiding nature of his devotion, which years hence would be unbroken
as to-day. He would never distress her by unwelcome demonstrations;
possibly she might never again hear from his lips what he now committed
to paper. Enough for him, Samuel, to cherish a love which could not but
exalt and purify him, which was indeed, 'in the words of Shakespeare, "a
liberal education."' In recompense of his self-command, he only besought
that Miss. Lord would allow him, from time to time, to look upon her
face, and to converse with her of intellectual subjects. 'A paper,'
he added, 'which I read last week at our Society, is now being
printed--solely at the request of friends. The subject is one that may
interest you, "The Influence of Culture on Morality." I beg that you
will accept the copy I shall have the pleasure of sending you, and that,
at some future date, you will honour me with your remarks thereon.'

Which epistle Nancy cruelly read aloud to Mary, with a sprightliness and
sarcastic humour not excelled by her criticisms of 'the Prophet' in days
gone by. Mary did not quite understand, but she saw in this behaviour a
proof of the wonderful courage with which Nancy faced her troubles.

A week had passed, and no news from America.

'I don't care,' said Nancy. 'Really and truly, I don't care. Yesterday
I never once thought of it--never once looked for the postman. The worst
is over now, and he may write or not, as he likes.'

Mary felt sure there would be an explanation of such strange silence.

'Only illness or death would explain it so as to make me forgive him.
But he isn't ill. He is alive, and enjoying himself.'

There was no bitterness in her voice. She seemed to have outlived all
sorrows and anxieties relative to her husband.

Mary suggested that it was always possible to call at Mr. Vawdrey's
house and make inquiries of Mrs. Baker.

'No, I won't do that. Other women would do it, but I won't. So long as I
mayn't tell the truth, I should only set them talking about me; you know
how. I see the use, now, of having a good deal of pride. I'm only sorry
for those letters I wrote when I wasn't in my senses. If he writes now,
I shall not answer. He shall know that I am as independent as he is.
What a blessed thing it is for a woman to have money of her own! It's
because most women haven't, that they're such poor, wretched slaves.'

'If he knew you were in want,' said her companion, 'he would never have
behaved like this.'

'Who can say?--No, I won't pretend to think worse of him than I do.
You're quite right. He wouldn't leave his wife to starve. It's certain
that he hears about me from some one. If I were found out, and lost
everything, some one would let him know. But I wouldn't accept support
from him, now. He might provide for his child, but he shall never
provide for me, come what may--never!'

It was in the evening, after dinner. Nancy had a newspaper, and was
reading the advertisements that offered miscellaneous employment.

'What do you think this can be?' she asked, looking up after a long
silence. '"To ladies with leisure. Ladies desiring to add to their
income by easy and pleasant work should write"'--&c. &c.

'I've no faith in those kind of advertisements,' said Mary.

'No; of course it's rubbish. There's no easy and pleasant way of earning
money; only silly people expect it. And I don't want anything easy
or pleasant. I want honest hard work. Not work with my hands--I'm not
suited for that, but real work, such as lots of educated girls are
doing. I'm quite willing to pay for learning it; most likely I shall
have to. Who could I write to for advice?'

They were sitting upstairs, and so did not hear a visitor's knock that
sounded at the front door. The servant came and announced that Miss.
French wished to see Miss. Lord.

'Miss. French? Is it the younger Miss. French?'

The girl could not say; she had repeated the name given to her. Nancy
spoke to her friend in a low voice.

'It may be Fanny. I don't think Beatrice would call, unless it's to say
something about her sister. She had better come up here, I suppose?'

Mary retired, and in a few moments there entered, not Fanny, but
Beatrice. She was civilly, not cordially, welcomed. Her eye, as
she spoke the words natural at such a meeting, dwelt with singular
persistency on Nancy's face.

'You are quite well again?'

'Quite, thank you.'

'It has been a troublesome illness, I'm afraid.'

Nancy hesitated, detecting a peculiarity of look and tone which caused
her uneasiness.

'I had a sort of low fever--was altogether out of sorts--"below par,"
the doctor said. Are you all well?'

Settling herself comfortably, as if for a long chat, Beatrice sketched
with some humour the course of recent events in De Crespigny Park.

'I'm out of it all, thank goodness. I prefer a quiet life. Then there's
Fanny. You know all about _her_, I dare say?'

'Nothing at all,' Nancy replied distantly.

'But your brother does. Hasn't he been to see you yet?'

Nancy was in no mood to submit to examination.

'Whatever I may have heard, I know nothing about Fanny's, affairs, and,
really, they don't concern me.

'I should have thought they might,' rejoined the other, smiling
absently. 'She has run away from her friends'--a pause--'and is living
somewhere rather mysteriously'--another pause--'and I think it more than
likely that she's _married_.'

The listener preserved a face of indifference, though the lines were
decidedly tense.

'Doesn't that interest you?' asked Beatrice, in the most genial tone.

'If it's true,' was the blunt reply.

'You mean, you are glad if she has married somebody else, and not your
brother?'

'Yes, I am glad of that.'

Beatrice mused, with wrinkles at the corner of her eye. Then, fixing
Nancy with a very keen look, she said quietly:

'I'm not sure that she's married. But if she isn't, no doubt she ought
to be.'

On Nancy's part there was a nervous movement, but she said nothing. Her
face grew rigid.

'I have an idea who the man is,' Miss. French pursued; 'but I can't
be quite certain. One has heard of similar cases. Even _you_ have, no
doubt?'

'I don't care to talk about it,' fell mechanically from Nancy's lips,
which had lost their colour.

'But I've come just for that purpose.'

The eyes of mocking scrutiny would not be resisted. They drew a gaze
from Nancy, and then a haughty exclamation.

'I don't understand you. Please say whatever you have to say in plain
words.'

'Don't be angry with me. You were always too ready at taking offence.
I mean it in quite a friendly way; you can trust me; I'm not one of the
women that chatter. Don't you think you ought to sympathise a little
with Fanny? She has gone to Brussels, or somewhere about there. But she
_might_ have gone down into Cornwall--to a place like Falmouth. It was
quite far enough off--don't you think?'

Nancy was stricken mute, and her countenance would no longer disguise
what she suffered.

'No need to upset yourself,' pursued the other in smiling confidence.
'I mean no harm. I'm curious, that's all; just want to know one or two
things. We're old friends, and whatever you tell me will go no further,
depend upon that.'

'What do you mean?'

The words came from lips that moved with difficulty. Beatrice, still
smiling, bent forward.

'Is it any one that I know?'

'Any one--? Who--?'

'That made it necessary for you to go down into Cornwall, my dear.'

Nancy heaved a sigh, the result of holding her breath too long. She half
rose, and sat down again. In a torture of flashing thoughts, she
tried to determine whether Beatrice had any information, or spoke
conjecturally. Yet she was able to discern that either case meant
disaster; to have excited the suspicions of such a person, was the same
as being unmasked; an inquiry at Falmouth, and all would at once be
known.

No, not all. Not the fact of her marriage; not the name of her husband.

Driven to bay by such an opponent, she assumed an air wholly unnatural
to her--one of cynical effrontery.

'You had better say what you know.'

'All right. Who was the father of the child born not long ago?'

'That's asking a question.'

'And telling what I know at the same time. It saves breath.'

Beatrice laughed; and Nancy, become a mere automaton, laughed too.

'That's more like it,' said Miss. French cheerfully. 'Now we shall get
on together. It's very shocking, my dear. A person of my strict morality
hardly knows how to look you in the face. Perhaps you had rather I
didn't try. Very well. Now tell me all about it, comfortably. I have a
guess, you know.'

'What is it?'

'Wait a little. I don't want to be laughed at. Is it any one I know?'

'You have never seen him, and I dare say never heard of him.'

Beatrice stared incredulously.

'I wouldn't tell fibs, Nancy.'

'I'm telling the truth.'

'It's very queer, then.'

'Who did you think--?'

The speaking automaton, as though by defect of mechanism, stopped short.

'Look straight at me. I shouldn't have been surprised to hear that it
was Luckworth Crewe.'

Nancy's defiant gaze, shame in anguish shielding itself with the front
of audacity, changed to utter astonishment. The blood rushed back into
her cheeks; she voiced a smothered exclamation of scorn.

'The father of my child? Luckworth Crewe?'

'I thought it not impossible,' said Beatrice, plainly baffled.

'It was like you.' Nancy gave a hard laugh. 'You judged me by yourself.
Have another guess!'

Surprised both at the denial, so obviously true, and at the unexpected
tone with which Nancy was meeting her attack, Miss. French sat
meditative.

'It's no use guessing,' she said at length, with complete good-humour.
'I don't know of any one else.'

'Very well. You can't expect me to tell you.'

'As you please. It's a queer thing; I felt pretty sure. But if you're
telling the truth, I don't care a rap who the man is.'

'You can rest in peace,' said Nancy, with careless scorn.

'Any way of convincing me, except by saying it?'

'Yes. Wait here a moment.'

She left the room, and returned with the note which Crewe had addressed
to her from the hotel at Falmouth.

'Read that, and look at the date.'

Beatrice studied the document, and in silence canvassed the
possibilities of trickery. No; it was genuine evidence. She remembered
the date of Crewe's journey to Falmouth, and, in this new light, could
interpret his quarrelsome behaviour after he had returned. Only the
discovery she had since made inflamed her with a suspicion which till
then had never entered her mind.

'Of course, you didn't let him see you?'

'Of course not.'.

'All right. Don't suppose I wanted to insult you. I took it for granted
you were married. Of course it happened before your father's death, and
his awkward will obliged you to keep it dark?'

Again Nancy was smitten with fear. Deeming Miss. French an unscrupulous
enemy, she felt that to confess marriage was to abandon every hope.
Pride appealed to her courage, bade her, here and now, have done
with the ignoble fraud; but fear proved stronger. She could not face
exposure, and all that must follow.

She spoke coldly, but with down-dropt eyes.

'I am not married.'

The words cost her little effort. Practically, she had uttered them
before; her overbold replies were an admission of what, from the first,
she supposed Beatrice to charge her with--not secret wedlock, but secret
shame. Beatrice, however, had adopted that line of suggestion merely
from policy, hoping to sting the proud girl into avowal of a legitimate
union; she heard the contrary declaration with fresh surprise.

'I should never have believed it of Miss. Lord,' was her half ingenuous,
half sly comment.

Nancy, beginning to realise what she had done, sat with head bent,
speechless.

'Don't distress yourself,' continued the other. 'Not a soul will hear of
it from me. If you like to tell me more, you can do it quite safely; I'm
no blabber, and I'm not a rascal. I should never have troubled to make
inquiries about you, down yonder, if it hadn't been that I suspected
Crewe. That's a confession, you know; take it in return for yours.'

Nancy was tongue-tied. A full sense of her humiliation had burst upon
her. She, who always condescended to Miss. French, now lay smirched
before her feet, an object of vulgar contempt.

'What does it matter?' went on Beatrice genially. 'You've got over the
worst, and very cleverly. Are you going to marry him when you come in
for your money?'

'Perhaps--I don't know--'

She faltered, no longer able to mask in impudence, and hardly
restraining tears. Beatrice ceased to doubt, and could only wonder with
amusement.

'Why shouldn't we be good friends, Nancy? I tell you, I am no rascal.
I never thought of making anything out of your secret--not I. If it had
been Crewe, marriage or no marriage--well, I might have shown my temper.
I believe I have a pretty rough side to my tongue; but I'm a good enough
sort if you take me in the right way. Of course I shall never rest for
wondering who it can be--'

She paused, but Nancy did not look up, did not stir.

'Perhaps you'll tell me some other time. But there's one thing I should
like to ask about, and it's for your own good that I should know it.
When Crewe was down there, don't you think he tumbled to anything?'

Perplexed by unfamiliar slang, Nancy raised her eyes.

'Found out anything, you mean? I don't know.'

'But you must have been in a jolly fright about it?'

'I gave it very little thought,' replied Nancy, able now to command a
steady voice, and retiring behind a manner of frigid indifference.

'No? Well, of course I understand that better now I know that you can't
lose anything. Still, it is to be hoped he didn't go asking questions.
By-the-bye, you may as well just tell me: he has asked you to marry him,
hasn't he?'

'Yes.'

Beatrice nodded.

'Doesn't matter. You needn't be afraid, even if he got hold of anything.
He isn't the kind of man to injure you out of spite.'

'I fear him as little as I fear you.'

'Well, as I've told you, you needn't fear me at all. I like you better
for this--a good deal better than I used to. If you want any help, you
know where to turn; I'll do whatever I can for you; and I'm in the way
of being useful to my friends. You're cut up just now; it's natural. I
won't bother you any longer. But just remember what I've said. If I can
be of any service, don't be above making use of me.'

Nancy heard without heeding; for an anguish of shame and misery once
more fell upon her, and seemed to lay waste her soul.




Part V: Compassed Round




CHAPTER 1



There needed not Mary Woodruff's suggestion to remind Nancy that no
further away than Champion Hill were people of whom, in extremity, she
might inquire concerning her husband. At present, even could she
have entertained the thought, it seemed doubtful whether the Vawdrey
household knew more of Tarrant's position and purposes than she herself;
for, only a month ago, Jessica Morgan had called upon the girls and had
ventured a question about their cousin, whereupon they answered that
he was in America, but that he had not written for a long time. To Mrs.
Baker, Jessica did not like to speak on the subject, but probably that
lady could have answered only as the children did.

Once, indeed, a few days after her return, Nancy took the familiar walk
along Champion Hill, and glanced, in passing, at Mr. Vawdrey's house;
afterwards, she shunned that region. The memories it revived were
infinitely painful. She saw herself an immature and foolish girl,
behaving in a way which, for all its affectation of reserve and dignity,
no doubt offered to such a man as Lionel Tarrant a hint that here, if he
chose, he might make a facile conquest. Had he not acted upon the
hint? It wrung her heart with shame to remember how, in those days, she
followed the lure of a crude imagination. A year ago? Oh, a lifetime!

Unwilling, now, to justify herself with the plea of love; doubtful, in
very truth, whether her passion merited that name; she looked back in
the stern spirit of a woman judging another's frailty. What treatment
could she have anticipated at the hands of her lover save that she had
received? He married her--it was much; he forsook her--it was natural.
The truth of which she had caught troublous glimpses in the heyday of
her folly now stood revealed as pitiless condemnation. Tarrant never
respected her, never thought of her as a woman whom he could seriously
woo and wed. She had a certain power over his emotions, and not the
sensual alone; but his love would not endure the test of absence. From
the other side of the Atlantic he saw her as he had seen her at first,
and shrank from returning to the bondage which in a weak moment he had
accepted.

One night about this time she said to herself:

'I was his mistress, never his wife.'

And all her desperate endeavours to obscure the history of their love,
to assert herself as worthy to be called wife, mother, had fallen
fruitless. Those long imploring letters, despatched to America from her
solitude by the Cornish sea, elicited nothing but a word or two which
sounded more like pity than affection. Pity does not suffice to recall
the wandering steps of a man wedded against his will.

In her heart, she absolved him of all baseness. The man of ignoble
thought would have been influenced by her market value as a wife.
Tarrant, all the more because he was reduced to poverty, would
resolutely forget the crude advantage of remaining faithful to her.

Herein Nancy proved herself more akin to her father than she had ever
seemed when Stephen Lord sought eagerly in her character for hopeful
traits.

The severity of her self-judgment, and the indulgence tempering her
attitude towards Tarrant, declared a love which had survived its phase
of youthful passion. But Nancy did not recognise this symptom of moral
growth. She believed herself to have become indifferent to her husband,
and only wondered that she did not hate him. Her heart seemed to spend
all its emotion on the little being to whom she had given life--a
healthy boy, who already, so she fancied, knew a difference between his
mother and his nurse, and gurgled a peculiar note of contentment when
lying in her arms. Whether wife or not, she claimed every privilege of
motherhood. Had the child been a weakling, she could not have known this
abounding solace: the defect would have reproached her. But from the day
of his birth he manifested so vigorous a will to live, clung so hungrily
to the fountain-breast, kicked and clamoured with such irresistible
self-assertion, that the mother's pride equalled her tenderness. 'My own
brave boy! My son!' Wonderful new words: honey upon the lips and rapture
to the ear. She murmured them as though inspired with speech never
uttered by mortal.

The interval of a day between her journeys to see the child taxed her
patience; but each visit brought a growth of confidence. No harm would
befall him: Mary had chosen wisely.

Horace kept aloof and sent no message. When at length she wrote to him
a letter all of sisterly kindness, there came a stinted reply. He
said that he was going away for a holiday, and might be absent until
September. 'Don't bother about me. You shall hear again before long.
There's just a chance that I may go in for business again, with prospect
of making money. Particulars when I see you.'

Nancy found this note awaiting her after a day's absence from home, and
with it another. To her surprise, Mrs. Damerel had written. 'I called
early this afternoon, wishing particularly to see you. Will you please
let me know when I should find you at home? It is about Horace that
I want to speak.' It began with 'My dear Nancy,' and ended, 'Yours
affectionately.' Glad of the opportunity thus offered, she answered at
once, making an appointment for the next day.

When Mrs. Damerel came, Nancy was even more struck than at their former
meeting with her resemblance to Horace. Eyes and lips recalled Horace at
every moment. This time, the conversation began more smoothly. On both
sides appeared a disposition to friendliness, though Nancy only marked
her distrust in the hope of learning more about this mysterious relative
and of being useful to her brother.

'You have a prejudice against me,' said the visitor, when she had
inquired concerning Nancy's health. 'It's only natural. I hardly seem
to you a real relative, I'm afraid--you know so little about me; and now
Horace has been laying dreadful things to my charge.'

'He thinks you responsible for what has happened to Fanny French,' Nancy
replied, in an impartial voice.

'Yes, and I assure you he is mistaken. Miss. French deceived him and her
own people, leading them to think that she was spending her time with
me, when really she was--who knows where? To you I am quite ready to
confess that I hoped something might come between her and Horace; but as
for plotting--really lam not so melodramatic a person. All I did in the
way of design was to give Horace an opportunity of seeing the girl in
a new light. You can imagine very well, no doubt, how she conducted
herself. I quite believe that Horace was getting tired and ashamed of
her, but then came her disappearance, and that made him angry with me.'

Even the voice suggested Horace's tones, especially when softened in
familiar dialogue. Nancy paid closer attention to the speaker's looks
and movements than to the matter of what she said. Mrs. Damerel might
possibly be a well-meaning woman--her peculiarities might result from
social habits, and not from insincerity; yet Nancy could not like her.
Everything about her prompted a question and a doubt. How old was
she? Probably much older than she looked. What was her breeding, her
education? Probably far less thorough than she would have one believe.
Was she in good circumstances? Nancy suspected that her fashionable and
expensive dress signified extravagance and vanity rather than wealth.

'I have brought a letter to show you which she has sent me from abroad.
Read it, and form your own conclusion. Is it the letter of an injured
innocent?'

A scrawl on foreign note-paper, which ran thus:

DEAR MRS DAMEREL,--Just a word to console you for the loss of my
society. I have gone to a better world, so dry your tears. If you see my
masher, tell him I've met with somebody a bit more like a man. I should
advise him to go to school again and finish his education. I won't
trouble you to write. Many thanks for the kindness you _didn't_ mean to
do me.--Yours in the best of spirits (I don't mean Cognac),

FANNY (_nee_) FRENCH.

Nancy returned the paper with a look of disgust, saying, 'I didn't think
she was as bad as that.'

'No more did I. It really gave me a little shock of surprise.'

'Do you think it likely she is married?'

Mrs. Damerel pursed her lips and arched her eyebrows with so unpleasant
an effect on Nancy that she looked away.

'I have no means whatever of forming an opinion.'

'But there's no more fear for Horace,' said Nancy.

'I hope not--I think not. But my purpose in coming was to consult with
you about the poor boy. He has renounced me; he won't answer my
letters; and I am so dreadfully afraid that a sort of despair--it sounds
ridiculous, but he is so very young--may drive him into reckless living.
You have taken part with him against me, I fear--'

'No, I haven't. I told him I was quite sure the girl had only herself to
blame, whatever happened.'

'How kind of you!' Mrs. Damerel sank her voice to a sort of cooing,
not unmelodious, but to Nancy's ear a hollow affectation. 'If we
could understand each other! I am so anxious for your dear brother's
happiness--and for yours, believe me. I have suffered greatly since he
told me I was his enemy, and cast me off.'

Here sounded a note of pathos which impressed the critical listener.
There was a look, too, in Mrs. Damerel's eyes quite unlike any that
Nancy had yet detected.

'What do you wish him to do?' she asked. 'If I must tell you the truth,
I don't think he'll get any good in the life of society.'

Society's representative answered in a tone of affectionate frankness:

'He won't; I can see that. I don't wish him to live idly. The
question is, What ought he to do? I think you know a gentleman of his
acquaintance, Mr. Crewe?'

The question was added rather abruptly, and with a watchful gaze.

'I know him a little.'

'Something has been said, I believe, about Horace investing money in Mr.
Crewe's business. Do you think it would be advisable?'

Surprise kept Nancy silent.

'Is Mr. Crewe trustworthy? I understand he has been in business for
himself only a short time.'

Nancy declared herself unable to judge Mr. Crewe, whether in private
or in commercial life. And here she paused, but could not refrain from
adding the question whether Mrs. Damerel had personal knowledge of him.

'I have met him once.'

Immediately, all Nancy's suspicions were revived. She had felt a desire
to talk of intimate things, with mention of her mother's name; but the
repulsion excited in her by this woman's air of subtlety, by looks,
movements, tones which she did not understand, forbade it. She could
not speak with satisfaction even of Horace, feeling that Mrs. Damerel's
affection, however genuine, must needs be baleful. From this point her
part in the dialogue was slight.

'If any of Miss. French's relatives,' said the visitor presently,
'should accuse me to you, you will be able to contradict them. I am sure
I can depend upon you for that service?'

'I am not likely to see them; and I should have thought you would care
very little what was said about you by people of that kind.'

'I care little enough,' rejoined Mrs. Damerel, with a curl of the lips.
'It's Horace I am thinking of. These people will embitter him against
me, so long as they have any ground to go upon.'

'But haven't you let him know of that letter?'

Mrs. Damerel seemed to fall into abstraction, answered with a vague
'Yes,' and after surveying the room, said softly:

'So you must live here alone for another two or three years?'

'It isn't compulsory: it's only a condition.'

Another vague 'Yes.' Then:

'I do so wish Horace would come back and make his home here.'

'I'm afraid you have spoilt him for that,' said Nancy, with relief in
this piece of plain speaking.

Mrs. Damerel did not openly resent it. She looked a mild surprise, and
answered blandly:

'Then I must undo the mischief. You shall help me. When he has got over
this little trouble, he will see who are his true friends. Let us work
together for his good.'

Nancy was inclined, once more, to reproach herself, and listened with
patience whilst her relative continued talking in grave kindly tones.
Lest she should spoil the effect of these impressive remarks, Mrs.
Damerel then took leave. In shaking hands, she bent upon the girl a gaze
of affection, and, as she turned away, softly sighed.

Of what had passed in the recent interview with Beatrice French, Nancy
said nothing to her faithful companion. This burden of shame must be
borne by herself alone. It affected profoundly the courageous mood
which had promised to make her life tolerable; henceforth, she all but
abandoned the hope of gaining that end for which she had submitted to
so deep a humiliation. Through Beatrice, would not her secret, coloured
shamefully, become known to Luckworth Crewe, and to others? Already,
perchance, a growing scandal attached to her name. Fear had enabled
her to endure dishonour in the eyes of one woman, but at any moment the
disgrace might front her in an intolerable shape; then, regardless of
the cost, she would proclaim her marriage, and have, in return for all
she had suffered, nothing but the reproach of an attempted fraud.

To find employment, means of honourable support, was an urgent
necessity.

She had written in reply to sundry advertisements, but without result.
She tried to draw up an advertisement on her own account, but found the
difficulty insuperable. What was there she could do? Teach children,
perhaps; but as a visiting governess, the only position of the kind
which circumstances left open to her, she could hope for nothing more
than the paltriest remuneration. Be somebody's 'secretary'? That sounded
pleasant, but very ambitious: a sense of incompetency chilled her. In an
office, in a shop, who would dream of giving her an engagement?

Walking about the streets of London in search of suggestions, she gained
only an understanding of her insignificance. In the battle of life every
girl who could work a sewing-machine or make a matchbox was of more
account than she. If she entered a shop to make purchases, the young
women at the counter seemed to smile superiority. Of what avail her
'education,' her 'culture'? The roar of myriad industries made mocking
laughter at such futile pretensions. She shrank back into her suburban
home.

A little book on 'employments for women,' which she saw advertised and
bought, merely heightened her discouragement. Here, doubtless, were
occupations she might learn; but, when it came to choosing, and
contemplating the practical steps that must be taken, her heart sank.
She was a coward; she dreaded the world; she saw as never yet the
blessedness of having money and a secure home.

The word 'home' grew very sweet to her ears. A man, she said to herself,
may go forth and find his work, his pleasure, in the highways; but is
not a woman's place under the sheltering roof? What right had a mother
to be searching abroad for tasks and duties? Task enough, duty obvious,
in the tending of her child. Had she but a little country cottage with
needs assured, and her baby cradled beside her, she would ask no more.

How idle all the thoughts of her girlhood! How little she knew of life
as it would reveal itself to her mature eyes!

Fatigued into listlessness, she went to the lending-library, and chose a
novel for an hour's amusement. It happened that this story was concerned
with the fortunes of a young woman who, after many an affliction sore,
discovered with notable suddenness the path to fame, lucre, and the
husband of her heart: she became at a bound a successful novelist.
Nancy's cheek flushed with a splendid thought. Why should not _she_
do likewise? At all events--for modesty was now her ruling
characteristic--why should she not earn a little money by writing
Stories? Numbers of women took to it; not a few succeeded. It was a
pursuit that demanded no apprenticeship, that could be followed in the
privacy of home, a pursuit wherein her education would be of service.
With imagination already fired by the optimistic author, she began to
walk about the room and devise romantic incidents. A love story, of
course--and why not one very like her own? The characters were ready to
her hands. She would begin this very evening.

Mary saw the glow upon her face, the delightful frenzy in her eyes, and
wondered.

'I have an idea,' said Nancy. 'Don't ask me about it. Just leave me
alone. I think I see my way.'

Daily she secluded herself for several hours; and, whatever the literary
value of her labour, it plainly kept her in good spirits, and benefited
her health. Save for the visits to her baby, regular as before, she
hardly left home.

Jessica Morgan came very often, much oftener than Nancy desired; not
only was her talk wearisome, but it consumed valuable time. She much
desired to see the baby, and Nancy found it difficult to invent excuses
for her unwillingness. When importunity could not be otherwise defeated,
she pretended a conscientious scruple.

