'I have deceived my husband in telling him that no one knows of our
marriage but Mary. If I let you see the child, I should feel that I was
deceiving him again. Don't ask me; I can't.'

Not unnaturally this struck Jessica as far-fetched. She argued against
it, and became petulant. Nancy lost patience, but remembered in time
that she was at Jessica's mercy, and, to her mortification, had to adopt
a coaxing, almost a suppliant, tone, with the result that Miss. Morgan's
overweening conceit was flattered into arrogance. Her sentimental
protestations became strangely mixed with a self-assertiveness very
galling to Nancy's pride. Without the slightest apparent cause for
ill-humour, she said one day:

'I do feel sorry for you; it must be a dreadful thing to have married a
man who has no sense of honour.'

Nancy fired up.

'What do you mean?'

'How can he have, when he makes you deceive people in this way for the
sake of the money he'll get?'

'He doesn't! It's my own choice.'

'Then he oughtn't let you do it. No honourable man would.'

'That has nothing to do with you,' Nancy exclaimed, anger blanching her
cheek. 'Please don't talk about my husband. You say things you ought to
be ashamed of.'

'Oh, don't be angry!' The facile tears started in Jessica's eyes. 'It's
because I feel indignant on your account, dear.'

'I don't want your indignation. Never mention this subject again, or I
shall feel sure you do it on purpose to annoy me.'

Jessica melted into mawkishness; none the less, Nancy felt a slave
to her former friend, who, for whatever reason, seemed to have grown
hypocritical and spiteful. When next the girl called, she was told that
Miss. Lord had left home for the day, a fiction which spared Nancy an
hour's torment. Miss. Morgan made up for it by coming very early on the
next Sunday afternoon, and preparing herself avowedly for a stay until
late in the evening. Resolute to avoid a long _tete-a-tete_, which was
sure to exasperate her temper, Nancy kept Mary in the room, and listened
to no hint from Jessica that they should retire for the accustomed
privacy.

At four o'clock they were joined by Samuel Barmby, whom, for once, Nancy
welcomed with pleasure. Samuel, who had come in the hope of finding
Miss. Lord alone, gave but the coldest attention to Jessica; Mary,
however, he greeted with grave courtesy, addressing to her several
remarks which were meant as a recognition of social equality in the
quondam servant. He was dressed with elaborate care. Snowy cuffs
concealed half his hands; his moustache, of late in training, sketched
the graceful curl it would presently achieve; a faint perfume attended
the drawing forth of his silk handkerchief.

Samuel never lacked a subject for the display of eloquence. Today it was
one that called for indignant fervour.

'A most disgraceful fact has come under my notice, and I am sorry
to say, Miss. Lord, that it concerns some one with whom you are
acquainted.'

'Indeed?' said Nancy, not without tremor. 'Who is that?'

'Mr. Peachey, of De Crespigny Park. I believe you are on terms of
friendship with the family.'

'Oh, you can hardly call it friendship. I know them.'

'Then I may speak without fear of paining you. You are aware that Mr
Peachey is a member of the firm of Ducker, Blunt & Co., who manufacture
disinfectants. Now, if any manufacture should be carried on in a
conscientious spirit--as of course _all_ manufactures should--surely it
is that of disinfectants. Only think what depends upon it! People who
make disinfectants ought to regard themselves as invested with a sacred
trust. The whole community looks to them for protection against disease.
The abuse of such confidence cannot be too severely condemned, all
the more so, that there is absolutely no legal remedy against the
adulteration of disinfectants. Did you know that, Miss. Lord? The law
guards against adulteration of food, but it seems--I have been making
inquiry into the matter--that no thought has ever been given by the
legislature to the subject of disinfectants!'

Nancy saw that Jessica was watching the speaker with jealous eyes, and,
in spite of prudence, she could not help behaving to Mr. Barmby more
graciously than usual; a small revenge for the treatment she had
suffered at the hands of Miss. Morgan.

'I could point out a great number of such anomalies,' pursued Samuel.
'But this matter of disinfectants is really one of the gravest. My
father has written to _The Times_ about it, and his letter will probably
be inserted to-morrow. I am thinking of bringing it before the attention
of our Society.'

'Do Mr. Peachey's people adulterate their disinfectants?' inquired
Nancy.

'I was going to tell you. Some acquaintances of ours have had a severe
illness in their house, and have been using disinfectants made by
Ducker, Blunt & Co. Fortunately they have a very good medical man, and
through him it has been discovered that these pretended safeguards are
all but absolutely worthless. He had the stuff analysed. Now, isn't
this shameful? Isn't this abominable? For my own part, I should call it
constructive murder.'

The phrase came by haphazard to Samuel's tongue, and he uttered it with
gusto, repeating it twice or thrice.

'Constructive murder--nothing short of that. And to think that these
people enjoy a positive immunity--impunity.' He corrected himself
quickly; then, uncertain whether he had really made a mistake, reddened
and twisted his gloves. 'To think'--he raised his voice--'that they are
capable of making money out of disease and death! It is one of the worst
illustrations of a corrupt spirit in the commercial life of our times
that has yet come under my observation.'

He remained for a couple of hours, talking ceaselessly. A glance which
he now and then cast at Miss. Morgan betrayed his hope that she would
take her leave before the necessary time of his own departure. Jessica,
perfectly aware of this desire, sat as though no less at home than
Nancy. Every remark she made was a stroke of malice at her friend, and
in her drawn features appeared the passions by which she was tormented.

As soon as Mr. Barmby had regretfully withdrawn, Nancy turned upon the
girl with flashing eyes.

'I want to speak to you. Come downstairs.'

She led the way to the dining-room. Jessica followed without a word.

'Why are you behaving like this? What has come to you?'

The feeble anaemic creature fell back before this outbreak of wholesome
wrath; her eyes stared in alarm.

'I won't put up with it,' cried Nancy. 'If you think you can insult me
because I trusted you when you were my only friend, you'll find your
mistake. A little more, and you shall see how little your power over me
is worth. Am I to live at _your_ mercy! I'd starve rather. What do you
mean by it?'

'Oh--Nancy--to think you should speak to me like this.'

'You are to be allowed to spit poison at me--are you? And I must bear
it? No, that I won't! Of course I know what's the matter with you. You
have fallen in love with Samuel Barmby.--You have! Any one can see
it. You have no more command of yourself than a child. And because he
prefers me to you, you rage against me. Idiot! What is Samuel Barmby to
me? Can I do more to keep him off? Can I say to him, "Do have pity on
poor Miss. Morgan, who--"'

She was interrupted by a scream, on which followed a torrent of frenzied
words from Jessica.

'You're a bad-hearted woman! You've behaved disgracefully yourself--oh!
I know more than you think; and now you accuse me of being as bad. Why
did you get married in such a hurry? Do you think I didn't understand
it? It's you who have no command over yourself. If the truth were known,
no decent woman would ever speak to You again. And you've got your
reward. Pretend as you like, I know your husband has deserted you. What
else could you expect? That's what makes you hate every one that hasn't
fallen into the mud. I wouldn't have such a character as yours! All this
afternoon you've been looking at that man as no married woman could who
respected herself. You encourage him; he comes here often--'

Hysterical passion strangled her voice, and before she could recover
breath, Nancy, terrible in ire, advanced upon her.

'Leave this house, and never dare to show yourself here again! Do what
you like, I'll endure you no longer--be off!'

Jessica retreated, her bloodless lips apart, her eyes starting as in
suffocation. She stumbled against a chair, fell to the ground, and, with
a cry of anguish, threw herself upon her knees before Nancy.

'What did I say? I didn't mean it--I don't know what I have been
saying--it was all madness. Oh, do forgive me! That isn't how I really
think of you--you know it isn't--I'm not so wicked as that. We have been
friends so long--I must have gone mad to speak such words. Don't drive
me away from you, dear, dear Nancy! I implore you to forgive me! Look, I
pray to you on my knees to forget it. Despise me for being such a weak,
wicked creature, but don't drive me away like that! I didn't mean one
word I said.'

'Rubbish! Of course you meant it. You have thought it every day, and
you'll say it again, behind my back, if not to my face. Stand up, and
don't make yourself sillier than you are.'

'You can't call me anything too bad--but don't drive me away. I can't
bear it. You are the only friend I have in the world--the only, only
friend. No one was ever kind and good to me but you, and this is how
I have repaid you. Oh, I hate myself! I could tear my tongue out
for saying such things. Only say that you'll try to forgive me--dear
Nancy--dear--'

She fell with face upon the carpet, and grovelled there in anguish of
conflicting passions, a lamentable object. Unable to bear the sight of
her, Nancy moved away, and stood with back turned, perforce hearing the
moans and sobs and half-articulate words which lasted until the fit
of hysteria left its victim in mute exhaustion. Then, contemptuously
pitiful, she drew near again to the prostrate figure.

'Stand up at once, and let us have an end of this vulgar folly. Stand
up, or I'll leave you here, and never speak to you again.'

'Nancy--can you forgive me?'

'I believe you have never got over your illness. If I were you, I should
see the doctor again, and try to be cured. You'll end in an asylum, if
you don't mind.'

'I often feel almost mad--I do really. Will you forget those dreadful
words I spoke? I know you can't forgive me at once--'

'Only stand up, and try to behave like a reasonable being. What do I
care for your words?'

The girl raised herself, threw her arms over a chair, and wept
miserably.



CHAPTER 2



On an afternoon at the end of October, Samuel Barmby, returned from
business, found Miss. Morgan having tea with his sisters. For a month
or two after Midsummer the Barmbys had scarcely seen her; now their
friendly intercourse was renewed, and Jessica came at least once a week.
She had an engagement at a girls' school in this neighbourhood, and,
though her health threatened another collapse, she talked of resuming
study for the Matriculation of next year.

Samuel, perfectly aware of the slavish homage which Miss. Morgan paid
him, took pleasure in posing before her. It never entered his mind to
make any return beyond genial patronage, but the incense of a female
devotee was always grateful to him, and he had come to look upon Jessica
as a young person peculiarly appreciative of intellectual distinction. A
week ago, walking with her to the omnibus after an evening she had spent
in Dagmar Road, he had indulged a spirit of confidence, and led her
to speak of Nancy Lord. The upshot of five minutes' conversation was a
frank inquiry, which he could hardly have permitted himself but for the
shadow of night and the isolating noises around them. As an intimate
friend, did she feel able to tell him whether or not Miss. Lord was
engaged to be married? Jessica, after a brief silence, answered that she
did _not_ feel at liberty to disclose what she knew on the subject; but
the words she used, and her voice in uttering them, left no doubt as to
her meaning. Samuel said no more. At parting, he pressed the girl's hand
warmly.

This afternoon, they began by avoiding each other's look. Samuel
seemed indisposed for conversation; he sipped at a cup of tea with an
abstracted and somewhat weary air, until Miss. Morgan addressed him.

'To-morrow is the evening of your lecture, isn't it, Mr. Barmby?'

'To-morrow.'

By the agency of a friend who belonged to a society of mutual
improvement at Pentonville, Samuel had been invited to go over and
illumine with his wisdom the seekers after culture in that remote
district, a proposal that flattered him immensely, and inspired him with
a hope of more than suburban fame. For some months he had spoken of
the engagement. He was to discourse upon 'National Greatness: its
Obligations and its Dangers.'

'Of course it will be printed afterwards?' pursued the devotee.

'Oh, I don't know. It's hardly worth that.'

'Oh, I'm sure it will be!'

And Jessica appealed to the sisters, who declared that certain passages
they had been privileged to hear seemed to them very remarkable.

Ladies were to be admitted, but the Miss. Barmbys felt afraid to
undertake so long a journey after dark.

'I know some one who would very much like to go,' said Jessica,
steadying her voice. 'Could you spare me a ticket to give away, Mr
Barmby?'

Samuel smiled graciously, and promised the ticket.

Of course it was for Jessica's own use. On the following evening,
long before the hour which would have allowed her ample time to reach
Pentonville by eight o'clock, she set forth excitedly. Unless Samuel
Barmby were accompanied by some friend from Camberwell,--only too
probable,--she might hope to make the return journey under his
protection. Perhaps he would speak again of Nancy Lord, and this time he
should be answered with less reserve. What harm if she even told him the
name of the man whom Nancy was 'engaged' to marry?

Nancy was no longer her friend. A show of reconciliation had followed
that scene on the Sunday afternoon three months ago; but Jessica well
knew that she had put herself beyond forgiveness, nor did she desire it.
Even without the memory of her offence, by this time she must needs have
regarded Nancy with steadfast dislike. Weeks had gone by since their
last meeting, which was rendered so unpleasant by mutual coldness that a
renewal of intercourse seemed out of the question.

She would not be guilty of treachery. But, in justice to herself, she
might give Samuel Barmby to understand how hopeless was his wooing.

To her disappointment, the lecture-room was small and undignified; she
had imagined a capacious hall, with Samuel Bennett Barmby standing up
before an audience of several hundred people. The cane-bottomed chairs
numbered not more than fifty, and at eight o'clock some of them were
still unoccupied. Nor did the assembly answer to her expectation. It
seemed to consist of young shopmen, with a few females of their kind
interspersed. She chose a place in the middle of the room, where the
lecturer could hardly fail to observe her presence.

With Barmby's entrance disillusion gave way before the ardours of flesh
and spirit. The whole hour through she never took her eyes from him.
His smooth, pink face, with its shining moustache, embodied her ideal of
manly beauty; his tall figure inflamed her senses; the words that fell
from his lips sounded to her with oracular impressiveness, conveying
a wisdom before which she bowed, and a noble enthusiasm to which she
responded in fervent exaltation. And she had been wont to ridicule this
man, to join in mockery of his eloquence with a conceited wanton such
as Nancy Lord! No, it never came from her heart; it was moral cowardice;
from the first she had recognised Samuel Barmby's infinite superiority
to the ignoble, the impure girl who dared to deride him.

He saw her; their eyes met once, and again, and yet again. He knew that
she alone in the audience could comprehend his noble morality, grasp the
extent of his far-sighted speculations. To her he spoke. And in his deep
glowing heart he could not but thank her for such evidence of sympathy.

There followed a tedious debate, a muddy flow of gabble and balderdash.
It was over by ten o'clock. With jealous eyes she watched her hero
surrounded by people who thought, poor creatures, that they were worthy
of offering him congratulations. At a distance she lingered. And behold,
his eye once more fell upon her! He came out from among the silly
chatterers, and walked towards her.

'You played me a trick, Miss. Morgan. I should never have allowed you to
come all this way to hear me.'

'If I had come ten times the distance, I should have been repaid!'

His round eyes gloated upon the flattery.

'Well, well, I mustn't pretend that I think the lecture worthless. But
you might have had the manuscript to read. Are you quite alone? Then I
must take care of you. It's a wretched night; we'll have a cab to King's
Cross.'

He said it with a consciousness of large-handed generosity. Jessica's
heart leapt and throbbed.

She was by his side in the vehicle. Her body touched his. She felt
his warm breath as he talked. In all too short a time they reached the
railway station.

'Did you come this way? Have you a ticket? Leave that to me.'

Again largely generous, he strode to the booking-office.

They descended and stood together upon the platform, among hurrying
crowds, in black fumes that poisoned the palate with sulphur. This
way and that sped the demon engines, whirling lighted waggons full of
people. Shrill whistles, the hiss and roar of steam, the bang, clap,
bang of carriage-doors, the clatter of feet on wood and stone--all
echoed and reverberated from a huge cloudy vault above them. High and
low, on every available yard of wall, advertisements clamoured to the
eye: theatres, journals, soaps, medicines, concerts, furniture, wines,
prayer-meetings--all the produce and refuse of civilisation announced
in staring letters, in daubed effigies, base, paltry, grotesque. A
battle-ground of advertisements, fitly chosen amid subterranean din and
reek; a symbol to the gaze of that relentless warfare which ceases not,
night and day, in the world above.

For the southward train they had to wait ten minutes. Jessica, keeping
as close as possible to her companion's side, tried to converse, but her
thoughts were in a tumult like to that about her. She felt a faintness,
a quivering in her limbs.

'May I sit down for a moment?' she said, looking at Barmby with a
childlike appeal.

'To be sure.'

She pointed in a direction away from the crowd.

'I have something to say--it's quieter--'

Samuel evinced surprise, but allowed himself to be led towards the black
mouth of the tunnel, whence at that moment rushed an engine with glaring
lights upon its breast.

'We may not be alone in the train,' continued Jessica. 'There's
something you ought to know I must tell you to-night. You were asking me
about Nancy Lord.'

She spoke with panting breath, and looked fixedly at him. The eagerness
with which he lent ear gave her strength to proceed.

'You asked me if she was engaged.'

'Yes--well?'

He had even forgotten his politeness; he saw in her a mere source of
information. Jessica moved closer to him on the bench.

'Had you any reason for thinking she was?'

'No particular reason, except something strange in her behaviour.'

'Would you like to know the whole truth?'

It was a very cold night, and a keen wind swept the platform; but
Jessica, though indifferently clad, felt no discomfort from this cause.
Yet she pressed closer to her companion, so that her cheek all but
touched his shoulder.

'Of course I should,' Barmby answered. 'Is there any mystery?'

'I oughtn't to tell.'

'Then you had better not. But why did you begin?'

'You ought to know.'

'Why ought I to know?'

'Because you--.' She broke off. A sudden chill made her teeth chatter.

'Well--why?' asked Samuel, with impatience.

'Are you--are you in love with her?'

Voice and look embarrassed him. So did the girl's proximity; she was
now all but leaning on his shoulder. Respectable Mr. Barmby could not be
aware that Jessica's state of mind rendered her scarcely responsible for
what she said or did.

'That's a very plain question,' he began; but she interrupted him.

'I oughtn't to ask it. There's no need for you to answer. I know you
have wanted to marry her for a long time. But you never will.'

'Perhaps not--if she has promised somebody else.'

'If I tell you--will you be kind to me?'

'Kind?'

'I didn't mean that,' she added hurriedly. 'I mean--will you understand
that I felt it a duty? I oughtn't to tell a secret; but it's a secret
that oughtn't to be kept. Will you understand that I did it out of--out
of friendship for you, and because I thought it right?'

'Oh, certainly. After going so far, you had better tell me and have done
with it.'

Jessica approached her lips to his ear, and whispered:

'She is married.'

'What? Impossible!'

'She was married at Teignmouth, just before she came back from her
holiday, last year.'

'Well! Upon my word! And that's why she has been away in Cornwall?'

Again Jessica whispered, her body quivering the while:

'She has a child. It was born last May.'

'Well! Upon my word! Now I understand. Who could have imagined!'

'You see what she is. She hides it for the sake of the money.'

'But who is her husband?' asked Samuel, staring at the bloodless face.

'A man called Tarrant, a relative of Mr. Vawdrey, of Champion Hill. She
thought he was rich. I don't know whether he is or not, but I believe he
doesn't mean to come back to her. He's in America now.'

Barmby questioned, and Jessica answered, until there was nothing left
to ask or to tell,--save the one thing which rose suddenly to Jessica's
lips.

'You won't let her know that I have told you?'

Samuel gravely, but coldly, assured her that she need not fear betrayal.



CHAPTER 3



It was to be in three volumes. She saw her way pretty clearly to the end
of the first; she had ideas for the second; the third must take care
of itself--until she reached it. Hero and heroine ready to her hand;
subordinate characters vaguely floating in the background. After an hour
or two of meditation, she sat down and dashed at Chapter One.

Long before the end of the year it ought to be finished.

But in August came her baby's first illness; for nearly a fortnight she
was away from home, and on her return, though no anxiety remained, she
found it difficult to resume work. The few chapters completed had a
sorry look; they did not read well, not at all like writing destined
to be read in print. After a week's disheartenment she made a new
beginning.

At the end of September baby again alarmed her. A trivial ailment as
before, but she could not leave the child until all was well. Again
she reviewed her work, and with more repugnance than after the previous
interruption. But go on with it she must and would. The distasteful
labour, slow, wearisome, often performed without pretence of hope, went
on until October. Then she broke down. Mary Woodruff found her crying by
the fireside, feverish and unnerved.

'I can't sleep,' she said. 'I hear the clock strike every hour, night
after night.'

But she would not confess the cause. In writing her poor novel she
had lived again through the story enacted at Teignmouth, and her heart
failed beneath its burden of hopeless longing. Her husband had forsaken
her. Even if she saw him again, what solace could be found in the mere
proximity of a man who did not love her, who had never loved her? The
child was not enough; its fatherless estate enhanced the misery of her
own solitude. When the leaves fell, and the sky darkened, and the long
London winter gloomed before her, she sank with a moan of despair.

Mary's strength and tenderness were now invaluable. By sheer force of
will she overcame the malady in its physical effects, and did wonders in
the assailing of its moral source. Her appeal now, as formerly, was to
the nobler pride always struggling for control in Nancy's character.
A few days of combat with the besieging melancholy that threatened
disaster, and Nancy could meet her friend's look with a smile. She put
away and turned the key upon her futile scribbling; no more of that.
Novel-writing was not her vocation; she must seek again.

Early in the afternoon she made ready to go forth on the only business
which now took her from home. It was nearly a week since she had seen
her boy.

Opening the front door, she came unexpectedly under two pairs of eyes.
Face to face with her stood Samuel Barmby, his hand raised to signal at
the knocker, just withdrawn from him. And behind Barmby was a postman,
holding a letter, which in another moment would have dropped into the
box.

Samuel performed the civil salute.

'Ha!--How do you do, Miss. Lord?--You are going out, I'm afraid.'

'Yes, I am going out.'

She replied mechanically, and in speaking took the letter held out to
her. A glance at it sent all her blood rushing upon the heart.

'I want to see you particularly,' said Samuel. 'Could I call again, this
afternoon?'

Nancy gazed at him, but did not hear. He saw the sudden pallor of her
cheeks, and thought he understood it. As she stood like a statue, he
spoke again.

'It is very particular business. If you could give me an appointment--'

'Business?--Oh, come in, if you like.'

She drew back to admit him, but in the passage stood looking at her
letter. Barmby was perplexed and embarrassed.

'You had rather I called again?'

'Called again? Just as you like.'

'Oh, then I will stay,' said Samuel bluntly. For he had things in mind
which disposed him to resent this flagrant discourtesy.

His voice awakened Nancy. She opened the door of the dining-room.

'Will you sit down, Mr. Barmby, and excuse me for a few minutes?'

'Certainly. Don't let me inconvenience you, Miss. Lord.'

At another time Nancy would have remarked something very unusual in his
way of speaking, especially in the utterance of her name. But for the
letter in her hand she must have noticed with uneasiness a certain
severity of countenance, which had taken the place of Barmby's wonted
smile. As it was, she scarcely realised his presence; and, on closing
the door of the room he had entered, she forthwith forgot that such a
man existed.

Her letter! His handwriting at last. And he was in England.

She flew up to her bedroom, and tore open the envelope. He was in
London; 'Great College Street, S. W.' A short letter, soon read.

DEAREST NANCY,--I am ashamed to write, yet write I must. All your
letters reached me; there was no reason for my silence but the
unwillingness to keep sending bad news. I have still nothing good to
tell you, but here I am in London again, and you must know of it.

When I posted my last letter to you from New York, I meant to come back
as soon as I could get money enough to pay my passage. Since then I have
gone through a miserable time, idle for the most part, ill for a few
weeks, and occasionally trying to write something that editors would pay
for. But after all I had to borrow. It has brought me home (steerage, if
you know what that means), and now I must earn more.

If we were to meet, I might be able to say something else. I can't write
it. Let me hear from you, if you think me worth a letter.--Yours ever,
dear girl,

L.

For a quarter of an hour she stood with this sheet open, as though still
reading. Her face was void of emotion; she had a vacant look, cheerless,
but with no more decided significance.

Then she remembered that Samuel Barmby was waiting for her downstairs.
He might have something to say which really concerned her. Better see
him at once and get rid of him. With slow step she descended to the
dining-room. The letter, folded and rolled, she carried in her hand.

'I'm sorry to have kept you waiting, Mr. Barmby.'

'Don't mention it. Will you sit down?'

'Yes, of course.' She spoke abstractedly, and took a seat not far from
him. 'I was just going out, but--there's no hurry.'

'I hardly know how to begin. Perhaps I had better prepare you by saying
that I have received very strange information.'

His air was magisterial; he subdued his voice to a note of profound
solemnity.

'What sort of information?' asked Nancy vaguely, her brows knitted in a
look rather of annoyance than apprehension.

'Very strange indeed.'

'You have said that already.'

Her temper was failing. She felt a nervous impulse to behave rudely, to
declare the contempt it was always difficult to disguise when talking
with Barmby.

'I repeat it, because you seem to have no idea what I am going to speak
of. I am the last person to find pleasure in such a disagreeable duty as
is now laid upon me. In that respect, I believe you will do me justice.'

'Will you speak plainly? This roundabout talk is intolerable.'

Samuel drew himself up, and regarded her with offended dignity. He had
promised himself no small satisfaction from this interview, had foreseen
its salient points. His mere aspect would be enough to subdue Nancy, and
when he began to speak she would tremble before him. Such a moment would
repay him for the enforced humility of years. Perhaps she would weep;
she might even implore him to be merciful. How to act in that event he
had quite made up his mind. But all such anticipations were confused by
Nancy's singular behaviour. She seemed, in truth, not to understand the
hints which should have overwhelmed her.

More magisterial than ever, he began to speak with slow emphasis.

'Miss. Lord,--I will still address you by that name,--though for a very
long time I have regarded you as a person worthy of all admiration, and
have sincerely humbled myself before you, I cannot help thinking that a
certain respect is due to me. Even though I find that you have deceived
me as to your position, the old feelings are still so strong in me that
I could not bear to give you needless pain. Instead of announcing to my
father, and to other people, the strange facts which I have learnt, I
come here as a friend,--I speak with all possible forbearance,--I do my
utmost to spare you. Am I not justified in expecting at least courteous
treatment?'

A pause of awful impressiveness. The listener, fully conscious at length
of the situation she had to face, fell into a calmer mood. All was over.
Suspense and the burden of falsehood had no longer to be endured. Her
part now, for this hour at all events, was merely to stand by whilst
Fate unfolded itself.

'Please say whatever you have to say, Mr. Barmby,' she replied with
quiet civility. 'I believe your intention was good. You made me nervous,
that was all.'

'Pray forgive me. Perhaps it will be best if I ask you a simple
question. You will see that the position I hold under your father's will
leaves me no choice but to ask it. Is it true that you are married?'

'I will answer if you tell me how you came to think that I was married.'

'I have been credibly informed.'

'By whom?'

'You must forgive me. I can't tell you the name.'

'Then I can't answer your question.'

Samuel mused. He was unwilling to break a distinct promise.

'No doubt,' said Nancy, 'you have undertaken not to mention the person.'

'I have.'

'If it is some one who used to be a friend of mine, you needn't have any
scruples. She as good as told me what she meant to do. Of course it is
Miss. Morgan?'

'As you have yourself spoken the name--'

'Very well. She isn't in her senses, and I wonder she has kept the
secret so long.'

'You admit the truth of what she has told me?'

'Yes. I am married.'

She made the avowal in a tone very like that in which, to Beatrice
French, she had affirmed the contrary.

'And your true name is Mrs. Tarrant?'

'That is my name.'

The crudely masculine in Barmby prompted one more question, but some
other motive checked him. He let his eyes wander slowly about the room.
Even yet there was a chance of playing off certain effects which he had
rehearsed with gusto.

'Can you imagine,'--his voice shook a little,--'how much I suffer in
hearing you say this?'

'If you mean that you still had the hopes expressed in your letter
some time ago, I can only say, in my defence, that I gave you an honest
answer.'

'Yes. You said you could never marry me. But of course I couldn't
understand it in this sense. It is a blow. I find it very hard to bear.'

He rose and went to the window, as if ashamed of the emotion he could
not command. Nancy, too much occupied with her own troubles to ask or
care whether his distress was genuine, laid Tarrant's letter upon a
side-table, and began to draw off her gloves. Then she unbuttoned her
jacket. These out-of-door garments oppressed her. Samuel turned his head
and came slowly back.

'There are things that might be said, but I will not say them. Most men
in my position would yield to the temptation of revenge. But for many
years I have kept in view a moral ideal, and now I have the satisfaction
of conquering my lower self. You shall not hear one word of reproach
from my lips.'

He waited for the reply, the expected murmur of gratitude. Nancy said
nothing.

'Mrs. Tarrant,'--he stood before her,--'what do you suppose must be the
result of this?'

'There can only be one.'

'You mean the ruin of your prospects. But do you forget that all the
money you have received since Mr. Lord's death has been obtained by
false pretences? Are you not aware that this is a criminal offence?'

Nancy raised her eyes and looked steadily at him.

'Then I must bear the punishment.'

For a minute Barmby enjoyed her suffering. Of his foreseen effects, this
one had come nearest to succeeding. But he was not satisfied; he hoped
she would beseech his clemency.

'The punishment might be very serious. I really can't say what view my
father may take of this deception.'

'Is there any use in talking about it? I am penniless--that's all you
have to tell me. What else I have to bear, I shall know soon enough.'

'One thing I must ask. Isn't your husband in a position to support you?'

'I can't answer that. Please to say nothing about my husband.'

Barmby caught at hope. It might be true, as Jessica Morgan believed,
that Nancy was forsaken. The man Tarrant might be wealthy enough to
disregard her prospects. In that case an assiduous lover, one who, by
the exercise of a prudent generosity, had obtained power over the girl,
could yet hope for reward. Samuel had as little of the villain in his
composition as any Camberwell householder. He cherished no dark designs.
But, after the manner of his kind, he was in love with Nancy, and even
the long pursuit of a lofty ideal does not render a man proof against
the elementary forces of human nature.

'We will suppose then,' he said, with a certain cheerfulness, 'that you
have nothing whatever to depend upon but your father's will. What is
before you? How can you live?'

'That is my own affair.'

It was not said offensively, but in a tone of bitter resignation. Barmby
sat down opposite to her, and leaned forward.

'Do you think for one moment,'--his voice was softly melodious,--'that
I--I who have loved you for years--could let you suffer for want of
money?'

He had not skill to read her countenance. Trouble he discerned, and
shame; but the half-veiled eyes, the quivering nostril, the hard, cold
lips, spoke a language beyond Samuel's interpretation. Even had he known
of the outrages previously inflicted upon her pride, and that this new
attack came at a moment when her courage was baffled, her heart cruelly
wounded, he would just as little have comprehended the spirit which now
kept her mute.

He imagined her overcome by his generosity. Another of his great effects
had come off with tolerable success.

'Put your mind at rest,' he pursued mellifluously. 'You shall suffer no
hardships. I answer for it.'

Still mute, and her head bowed low. Such is the power of nobility
displayed before an erring soul!

'You have never done me justice. Confess that you haven't!'

To this remarkable appeal Nancy perforce replied:

'I never thought ill of you.'

When she had spoken, colour came into her cheeks. Observing it, Samuel
was strangely moved. Had he impressed her even more profoundly than he
hoped to do? Jessica Morgan's undisguised subjugation had flattered him
into credulity respecting his influence over the female mind.

'But you didn't think me capable of--of anything extraordinary?' Even in
her torment, Nancy marvelled at this revelation of fatuity. She did not
understand the pranks of such a mind as Barmby's when its balance is
disturbed by exciting circumstance.

'What are you offering me?' she asked, in a low voice. 'How could I take
money from you?'

'I didn't mean that you should. Your secret has been betrayed to me.
Suppose I refuse to know anything about it, and leave things as they
were?'

Nancy kept her eyes down.

'Suppose I say: Duty bids me injure this woman who has injured _me_; but
no, I will not! Suppose I say: I can make her regret bitterly that she
married that other man; but no, I will not! Suppose, instead of making
your secret known, I do my utmost to guard it! What would be your
opinion of this behaviour?'

'I should think it was kindly meant, but useless.'

'Useless? Why?'

'Because it isn't in your power to guard the secret. Jessica Morgan
won't leave her work half done.'

'If that's all, I say again that you can put your mind at rest. I answer
for Miss. Morgan. With her my will is law.'

Samuel smiled. A smile ineffable. The smile of a suburban deity.

'Why should you take any trouble about me?' said Nancy. 'I can do
nothing for you in return.'

'You can.'

She looked anxiously at him, for his voice sounded ominous.

'What?'

'You can acknowledge that you never did me justice.'

'It's true that I didn't,' she answered languidly; speaking as though
the concession mattered little.

Barmby brightened. His hands were upon his knees; he raised his chin,
and smiled at vacancy.

'You thought me unworthy of you. You can confess to me that you were
mistaken.'

'I didn't know you as I do now,' fell from the expressionless lips.

'Thank you for saying that! Well, then, your anxiety is at an end. You
are not in the hands of a mercenary enemy, but of a man whose principles
forbid him to do anything ignoble, who has an ideal of life, the result
of much study and thought. You have never heard me speak about religion,
but you would be gravely mistaken if you thought I had no religious
convictions. Some day I shall treat that subject before our Society,
and it is probable that my views will give rise to a good deal of
discussion. I have formed a religion for myself; when I write my essay,
I think I shall call it "The Religion of a Man of Business." One of
the great evils of the day is the vulgar supposition that commerce has
nothing to do with religious faith. I shall show how utterly wrong
that is. It would take too long to explain to you my mature views of
Christianity. I am not sure that I recognise any of the ordinary dogmas;
I think I have progressed beyond them. However, we shall have many
opportunities of talking about these things.'

Nancy uttered a mere 'Yes.' She was looking at Tarrant's letter on the
side-table, and wishing to be alone that she might read it again.

'In the meantime,' Samuel pursued, 'whatever difficulty arises, confide
it to me. Probably you will wish to tell me more before long; you know
that I am not unworthy to be your adviser. And so let us shake hands, in
sign of genuine friendship.'

Nancy gave her fingers, which felt very cold upon Barmby's warm, moist
palm.

'This conversation has been trying to you,' he said, 'but relief of mind
will soon follow. If anything occurs to me that may help to soothe you,
I will write.'

'Thank you.'

'At the beginning of our interview you didn't think it would end like
this?'

There was something of the boy in Samuel, perhaps the wholesomest
part of him. Having manifested his admirable qualities, he felt a
light-hearted pleasure in asking for renewed assurance of the good
opinion he had earned.

'I hardly cared,' said Nancy, as she rose with a sigh of weariness.

'But you have got over that. You will be quite cheerful now?'

'In time, no doubt.'

'I shall call again--let us say on Wednesday evening. By that time I
shall be able to put you entirely at ease with regard to Miss Morgan.'

Nancy made no reply. In shaking hands, she regarded the radiant Samuel
with a dreamy interest; and when he had left her, she still gazed for a
few moments at the door.



CHAPTER 4



The habit of confidence prompted Nancy to seek Mary Woodruff, and show
her the long-expected letter. But for Barmby's visit she would have done
so. As it was, her mind sullenly resisted the natural impulse. Forlorn
misery, intensified by successive humiliations, whereof the latest
was the bitterest, hardened her even against the one, the indubitable
friend, to whom she had never looked in vain for help and solace. Of
course it was not necessary to let Mary know with what heart-breaking
coldness Tarrant had communicated the fact of his return; but she
preferred to keep silence altogether. Having sunk so low as to accept,
with semblance of gratitude, pompous favours, dishonouring connivance,
at the hands of Samuel Barmby, she would now stand alone in her
uttermost degradation. Happen what might, she would act and suffer in
solitude.

Something she had in mind to do which Mary, if told of it, would regard
with disapproval. Mary was not a deserted and insulted wife; she could
reason and counsel with the calmness of one who sympathised, but had
nothing worse to endure. Even Mary's sympathy was necessarily imperfect,
since she knew not, and should never know, what had passed in the
crucial interviews with Beatrice French, with Jessica Morgan, and
with Samuel Barmby. Bent on indulging her passionate sense of injury,
hungering for a taste of revenge, however poor, Nancy executed with
brief delay a project which had come into her head during the hour of
torture just elapsed.

She took a sheet of notepaper, and upon it wrote half-a-dozen lines,
thus:

'As your reward for marrying me is still a long way off, and as you tell
me that you are in want, I send you as much as I can spare at present.
Next month you shall hear from me again.'

Within the paper she folded a five-pound note, and placed both in an
envelope, which she addressed to Lionel Tarrant, Esq., at his lodgings
in Westminster. Having posted this at the first pillar-box she walked
on.

Her only object was to combat mental anguish by bodily exercise, to
distract, if possible, the thoughts which hammered upon her brain by
moving amid the life of the streets. In Camberwell Road she passed the
place of business inscribed with the names 'Lord and Barmby'; it made
her think, not of the man who, from being an object of her good-natured
contempt, was now become a hated enemy, but of her father, and she
mourned for him with profounder feeling than when her tears flowed
