over his new-made grave. But for headstrong folly, incredible in the
retrospect, that father would have been her dear and honoured companion,
her friend in every best sense of the word, her guide and protector.
Many and many a time had he invited her affection, her trust. For long
years it was in her power to make him happy, and, in doing so, to enrich
her own life, to discipline her mind as no study of books, even had it
been genuine, ever could. Oh, to have the time back again--the despised
privilege--the thwarted embittered love! She was beginning to understand
her father, to surmise with mature intelligence the causes of his
seeming harshness. To her own boy, when he was old enough, she would
talk of him and praise him. Perhaps, even thus late, his spirit of stern
truthfulness might bear fruit in her life and in her son's.

The tender memory and pure resolve did not long possess her. They soon
yielded before the potency of present evil, and for an hour or more she
walked along the sordid highway, nursing passions which struck their
venom into her heart.

It was one of those cold, dry, clouded evenings of autumn, when London
streets affect the imagination with a peculiar suggestiveness. New-lit
lamps, sickly yellow under the dying day, stretch in immense vistas,
unobscured by fog, but exhibit no detail of the track they will
presently illumine; one by one the shop-fronts grow radiant on deepening
gloom, and show in silhouette the figures numberless that are hurrying
past. By accentuating a pause between the life of daytime and that which
will begin after dark, this grey hour excites to an unwonted perception
of the city's vastness and of its multifarious labour; melancholy, yet
not dismal, the brooding twilight seems to betoken Nature's compassion
for myriad mortals exiled from her beauty and her solace. Noises far and
near blend into a muffled murmur, sound's equivalent of the impression
received by the eye; it seems to utter the weariness of unending
ineffectual toil.

Nancy had now walked as far as Newington, a district unfamiliar to
her, and repulsive. By the Elephant and Castle she stood watching the
tumultuous traffic which whirls and roars at this confluence of six
highways; she had neither a mind to go on, nor yet to return. The
conductor of an omnibus close at hand kept bellowing 'London Bridge!'
and her thoughts wandered to that day of meeting with Luckworth Crewe,
when he took her up the Monument. She had never felt more than an idle
interest in Crewe, and whenever she remembered him nowadays, it was
only to reflect with bitterness that he doubtless knew a part of her
secret,--the part that was known to Beatrice French,--and on that
account had ceased to urge his suit; yet at this moment she wished that
she had pledged herself to him in good faith. His behaviour argued the
steadfast devotion of an honest man, however lacking in refinement.
Their long engagement would have been brightened with many hopes; in the
end she might have learned to love him, and prosperity would have opened
to her a world of satisfactions, for which she could no longer hope.

It grew cold. She allowed the movements of a group of people to direct
her steps, and went eastward along New Kent Road. But when the shops
were past, and only a dreary prospect of featureless dwellings
lay before her, she felt her heart sink, and paused in vacillating
wretchedness.

From a house near by sounded a piano; a foolish jingle, but it smote her
with a longing for companionship, for friendly, cheerful talk. And
then of a sudden she determined that this life of intolerable isolation
should come to an end. Her efforts to find employment that would bring
her among people had failed simply because she applied to strangers, who
knew nothing of her capabilities, and cared nothing for her needs. But a
way offered itself if she could overcome the poor lingering vestiges of
pride and shame which hitherto had seemed to render it impossible. In
this hour her desolate spirit rejected everything but the thought of
relief to be found in new occupation, fresh society. She had endured to
the limit of strength. Under the falling night, before the grey vision
of a city which, by its alien business and pleasure, made her a mere
outcast, she all at once found hope in a resource which till now had
signified despair.

Summoning the first empty cab, she gave an address known to her only by
hearsay, that of the South London Fashionable Dress Supply Association,
and was driven thither in about a quarter of an hour. The shop, with its
windows cunningly laid out to allure the female eye, spread a brilliant
frontage between two much duller places of business; at the doorway
stood a commissionaire, distributing some newly printed advertisements
to the persons who entered, or who paused in passing. Nancy accepted a
paper without thinking about it, and went through the swing doors held
open for her by a stripling in buttons; she approached a young woman at
the nearest counter, and in a low voice asked whether Miss. French was
on the premises.

'I'm not sure, madam. I will inquire at once.'

'She calls me "madam,"' said Nancy to herself whilst waiting. 'So do
shopkeepers generally. I suppose I look old.'

The young person (she honeyed a Cockney twang) speedily came back to
report that Miss. French had left about half-an-hour ago, and was not
likely to return.

'Can you give me her private address?'

Not having seen Miss. French since the latter's unwelcome call in Grove
Lane, she only knew that Beatrice had left De Crespigny Park to inhabit
a flat somewhere or other.

'I wish to see her particularly, on business.'

'Excuse me a moment, madam.'

On returning, the young person requested Nancy to follow her up the
shop, and led into a glass-partitioned office, where, at a table covered
with fashion-plates, sat a middle-aged man, with a bald head of peculiar
lustre. He rose and bowed; Nancy repeated her request.

'Could I despatch a message for you, madam?'

'My business is private.'

The bald-headed man coughed urbanely, and begged to know her name.

'Miss. Lord--of Grove Lane.'

Immediately his countenance changed from deprecating solemnity to a
broad smile of recognition.

'Miss. Lord! Oh, to be sure; I will give you the address at once. Pray
pardon my questions; we have to be so very careful. So many people
desire private interviews with Miss. French. I will jot down the
address.'

He did so on the back of an advertisement, and added verbal directions.
Nancy hurried away.

Another cab conveyed her to Brixton, and set her down before a block
of recently built flats. She ascended to the second floor, pressed the
button of a bell, and was speedily confronted by a girl of the natty
parlour-maid species. This time she began by giving her name, and had
only a moment to wait before she was admitted to a small drawing-room,
furnished with semblance of luxury. A glowing fire and the light of an
amber-shaded lamp showed as much fashionable upholstery and bric-a-brac
as could be squeezed into the narrow space. Something else was
perceptible which might perhaps have been dispensed with; to wit,
the odour of a very savoury meal, a meal in which fried onions had no
insignificant part. But before the visitor could comment to herself upon
this disadvantage attaching to flats, Beatrice joined her.

'I could hardly believe it! So you have really looked me up? Awfully
jolly of you! I'm quite alone; we'll have a bit of dinner together.'

Miss. French was in her most expansive mood. She understood the call as
one of simple friendliness.

'I wasn't sure that you knew the address. Got it at the shop? They don't
go telling everybody, I hope--'

'Some one there seemed to know my name,' said Nancy, whom the warmth and
light and cheery welcome encouraged in the step she had taken. And she
explained.

'Ah, Mr. Clatworthy--rum old cove, when you get to know him. Yes, yes;
no doubt he has heard me speak of you--in a general way, you know. Come
into my snooze-corner, and take your things off.'

The snooze-corner, commonly called a bedroom, lacked one detail of
comfort--pure air. The odour of dinner blending with toilet perfumes
made an atmosphere decidedly oppressive. Beatrice remarked on the
smallness of the chamber, adding archly, 'But I sleep single.'

'What's your brother doing?' she asked, while helping to remove Nancy's
jacket. 'I passed him in Oxford Street the other day, and he either
didn't see me, or didn't want to. Thought he looked rather dissipated.'

'I know very little about him,' answered the visitor, who spoke and
acted without reflection, conscious chiefly at this moment of faintness
induced by fatigue and hunger.

'Fanny's in Paris,' pursued Miss. French. 'Writes as if she was amusing
herself. I think I shall run over and have a look at her. Seen Ada?
She's been playing the fool as usual. Found out that Arthur had taken
the kid to his sister's at Canterbury; went down and made a deuce of a
kick-up; they had to chuck her out of the house. Of course she cares no
more about the child than I do; it's only to spite her husband. She's
going to law with him, she says. She won't leave the house in De
Crespigny Park, and she's running up bills--you bet!'

Nancy tried to laugh. The effort, and its semi-success, indicated
surrender to her companion's spirit rather than any attention to the
subject spoken of.

They returned to the drawing-room, but had not time to begin a
conversation before the servant summoned them to dinner. A very
satisfying meal it proved; not badly cooked, as cooking is understood in
Brixton, and served with more of ceremony than the guest had expected.
Fried scallops, rump steak smothered in onions, an apple tart, and very
sound Stilton cheese. Such fare testified to the virile qualities of
Beatrice's mind; she was above the feminine folly of neglecting honest
victuals. Moreover, there appeared two wines, sherry and claret.

'Did you ever try this kind of thing?' said the hostess finally,
reaching a box of cigarettes.

'I?--Of course not,' Nancy replied, with a laugh.

'It's expected of a sensible woman now-a-days. I've got to like it.
Better try; no need to make yourself uncomfortable. Just keep the smoke
in your mouth for half-a-minute, and blow it out prettily. I buy these
in the Haymarket; special brand for women.'

'And you dine like this, by yourself, every day?'

'Like this, but not always alone. Some one or other drops in. Luckworth
Crewe was here yesterday.'

Speaking, she watched Nancy, who bore the regard with carelessness, and
replied lightly:

'It's an independent sort of life, at all events.'

'Just the kind of life that suits me. I'm my own mistress.'

There was a suggested allusion in the sly tone of the last phrase; but
Nancy, thinking her own thoughts, did not perceive it. As the servant
had left them alone, they could now talk freely. Beatrice, by her
frequent glance of curiosity, seemed to await some explanation of a
visit so unlooked-for.

'How are things going with you?' she asked at length, tapping the ash of
her cigarette over a plate.

'I want something to do,' was the blunt reply.

'Too much alone--isn't that it?'

'Yes.'

'Just what I thought. You don't see him often?'

Nancy had ceased her pretence of smoking, and leaned back. A flush
on her face, and something unwonted in the expression of her
eyes,--something like a smile, yet touched with apathy,--told of
physical influences which assisted her resolve to have done with scruple
and delicacy. She handled her wine-glass, which was half full, and,
before answering, raised it to her lips.

'No, I don't see him often.'

'Well, I told you to come to me if I could be any use. What's your
idea?'

'Do you know of anything I could do? It isn't so much to earn money,
as to--to be occupied, and escape from loneliness. But I must have two
afternoons in the week to myself.'

Beatrice nodded and smiled.

'No,--not for that,' Nancy added hastily. 'To see my boy.'

The other appeared to accept this correction.

'All right. I think I can find you something. We're opening a
branch.' She mentioned the locality. 'There'll be a club-room, like
at headquarters, and we shall want some one ladylike to sit there and
answer questions. You wouldn't be likely to see any one that knows you,
and you'd get a good deal of fun out of it. Hours from ten to five, but
Saturday afternoon off, and Wednesday after three, if that would do?'

'Yes, that would do very well. Any payment, at first?'

'Oh, we wouldn't be so mean as all that. Say ten shillings a week till
Christmas, and afterwards we could see'--she laughed--'whether you're
worth more.'

'I know nothing about fashions.'

'You can learn all you need to know in an hour. It's the ladylike
appearance and talk more than anything else.'

Nancy sipped again from her wine-glass.

'When could I begin?'

'The place 'll be ready on Monday week. Next week you might put in a
few hours with us. Just sit and watch and listen, that's all; to get the
hang of the thing.'

'Thank you for being so ready to help me.'

'Not a bit of it. I haven't done yet. There's a condition. If I fix up
this job for you, will you tell me something I want to know?'

Nancy turned her eyes apprehensively.

'You can guess what it is. I quite believe what you told me some time
ago, but I shan't feel quite easy until I know--'

She finished the sentence with a look. Nancy's eyes fell.

'Curiosity, nothing else,' added the other. 'Just to make quite sure it
isn't anybody I've thought of.'

There was a long silence. Leaning forward upon the table, Nancy turned
her wine-glass about and about. She now had a very high colour, and
breathed quickly.

'Is it off, then?' said Beatrice, in an indifferent tone.

Thereupon Nancy disclosed the name of her husband--her lover, as Miss.
French thought him. Plied with further questions, she told where he
was living, but gave no account of the circumstances that had estranged
them. Abundantly satisfied, Beatrice grew almost affectionate, and
talked merrily.

Nancy wished to ask whether Luckworth Crewe had any knowledge of her
position. It was long before her lips could utter the words, but at
length they were spoken. And Beatrice assured her that Crewe, good silly
fellow, did not even suspect the truth.



CHAPTER 5



'For a man,' said Tarrant, 'who can pay no more than twelve and sixpence
a week, it's the best accommodation to be found in London. There's
an air of civilisation about the house. Look; a bath, and a little
book-case, and an easy-chair such as can be used by a man who respects
himself. You feel you are among people who tub o' mornings and know the
meaning of leisure. Then the view!'

He was talking to his friend Harvey Munden, the journalist. The room
in which they stood might with advantage have been larger, but as a
bed-chamber it served well enough, and only the poverty of its occupant,
who put it to the additional use of sitting-room and study, made the
lack of space particularly noticeable. The window afforded a prospect
pleasant enough to eyes such as theirs. Above the lower houses on the
opposite side of the way appeared tall trees, in the sere garb of later
autumn, growing by old Westminster School; and beyond them, grey in
twilight, rose the towers of the Abbey. From this point of view no
vicinage of modern brickwork spoilt their charm; the time-worn monitors
stood alone against a sky of ruddy smoke-drift and purple cloud.

'The old Adam is stronger than ever in me,' he pursued. 'If I were
condemned for life to the United States, I should go mad, and perish in
an attempt to swim the Atlantic.'

'Then why did you stay so long?'

'I could have stayed with advantage even longer. It's something to have
studied with tolerable thoroughness the most hateful form of society yet
developed. I saw it at first as a man does who is living at his ease;
at last, as a poor devil who is thankful for the institution of free
lunches. I went first-class, and I came back as a steerage passenger. It
has been a year well spent.'

It had made him, in aspect, more than a twelve-month older. His lounging
attitude, the spirit of his talk, showed that he was unchanged in bodily
and mental habits; but certain lines new-graven upon his visage, and
an austerity that had taken the place of youthful self-consciousness,
signified a more than normal progress in experience.

'Do you know,' said Munden slyly, 'that you have brought back a
trans-Atlantic accent?'

'Accent? The devil! I don't believe it.'

'Intonation, at all events.'

Tarrant professed a serious annoyance.

'If that's true, I'll go and live for a month in Limerick.'

'It would be cheaper to join a Socialist club in the East End. But just
tell me how you stand. How long can you hold out in these aristocratic
lodgings?'

'Till Christmas. I'm ashamed to say how I've got the money, so don't
ask. I reached London with empty pockets. And I'll tell you one thing I
have learnt, Munden. There's no villainy, no scoundrelism, no baseness
conceivable, that isn't excused by want of money. I understand the whole
"social question." The man who has never felt the perspiration come out
on his forehead in asking himself how he is going to keep body and soul
together, has no right to an opinion on the greatest question of the
day.'

'What particular scoundrelism or baseness have you committed?' asked the
other.

Tarrant averted his eyes.

'I said I could understand such things.'

'One sees that you have been breathed upon by democracy.'

'I loathe the word and the thing even more than I did, which is saying a
good deal.'

'Be it so. You say you are going to work?'

'Yes, I have come back to work. Even now, it's difficult to realise that
I must work or starve. I understand how fellows who have unexpectedly
lost their income go through life sponging on relatives and friends.
I understand how an educated man goes sinking through all the social
grades, down to the common lodging-house and the infirmary. And I
honestly believe there's only one thing that saves me from doing
likewise.'

'And what's that?'

'I can't tell you--not yet, at all events.'

'I always thought you a very fine specimen of the man born to do
nothing,' said Munden, with that smile which permitted him a surprising
candour in conversation.

'And you were quite right,' returned Tarrant, with a laugh. 'I am a born
artist in indolence. It's the pity of pities that circumstances will
frustrate Nature's purpose.'

'You think you can support yourself by journalism?'

'I must try.--Run your eye over that.'

He took from the table a slip of manuscript, headed, 'A Reverie in Wall
Street.' Munden read it, sat thoughtful for a moment, and laughed.

'Devilish savage. Did you write it after a free lunch?'

'Wrote it this morning. Shall I try one of the evening papers with
it,--or one of the weeklies?'

Munden suggested a few alterations, and mentioned the journal which he
thought might possibly find room for such a bit of satire.

'Done anything else?'

'Here's a half-finished paper--"The Commercial Prospects of the
Bahamas."'

'Let me look.'

After reading a page or two with critically wrinkled forehead, Munden
laid it down.

'Seems pretty solid,--libellous, too, I should say. You've more stuff
in you than I thought. All right: go ahead.--Come and dine with me
to-morrow, to meet a man who may be useful.'

'To-morrow I can't. I dine at Lady Pollard's.'

'Who is she?'

'Didn't you know Pollard of Trinity?--the only son of his mother, and
she a widow.'

'Next day, then.'

'Can't. I dine with some people at Bedford Park.'

Munden lifted his eyebrows.

'At this rate, you may live pretty well on a dress suit. Any more
engagements?'

'None that I know of. But I shall accept all that offer. I'm hungry
for the society of decent English people. I used to neglect my
acquaintances; I know better now. Go and live for a month in a cheap
New York boarding-house, and you'll come out with a wholesome taste for
English refinement.'

To enable his friend to read, Tarrant had already lit a lamp. Munden,
glancing about the room, said carelessly:

'Do you still possess the furniture of the old place?'

'No,' was the answer, given with annoyance. 'Vawdrey had it sold for
me.'

'Pictures, books, and all the nick-nacks?'

'Everything.--Of course I'm sorry for it; but I thought at the time that
I shouldn't return to England for some years.'

'You never said anything of that kind to me.'

'No, I didn't,' the other replied gloomily. And all at once he fell into
so taciturn a mood, that his companion, after a few more remarks and
inquiries, rose from his chair to leave.

From seven to nine Tarrant sat resolutely at his table, and covered a
few pages with the kind of composition which now came most easily to
him,--a somewhat virulent sarcasm. He found pleasure in the work; but
after nine o'clock his thoughts strayed to matters of personal interest,
and got beyond control. Would the last post of the evening bring him
an answer to a letter he had despatched this morning? At length he laid
down his pen, and listened nervously for that knock which, at one time
or another, is to all men a heart-shaking sound.

It came at the street door, and was quickly followed by a tap at his
own. Nancy had lost no time in replying. What her letter might contain
he found it impossible to conjecture. Reproaches? Joyous welcome? Wrath?
Forgiveness? He knew her so imperfectly, that he could not feel
sure even as to the probabilities of the case. And his suspense was
abundantly justified. Her answer came upon him with the force of a shock
totally unexpected.

He read the lines again and again; he stared at the bank-note. His
first sensation was one of painful surprise; thereupon succeeded fiery
resentment. Reason put in a modest word, hinting that he had deserved
no better; but he refused to listen. Nothing could excuse so gross an
insult. He had not thought Nancy capable of this behaviour. Tested, she
betrayed the vice of birth. Her imputation upon his motive in marrying
her was sheer vulgar abuse, possible only on vulgar lips. Well and
good; now he knew her; all the torment of conscience he had suffered was
needless. And for the moment he experienced a great relief.

In less than ten minutes letter and bank-note were enclosed in a new
envelope, and addressed back again to the sender. With no word of
comment; she must interpret him as she could, and would. He went out,
and threw the offensive packet into the nearest receptacle for such
things.

Work was over for to-night. After pacing in the obscurity of Dean's Yard
until his pulse had recovered a normal beat, he issued into the peopled
ways, and turned towards Westminster Bridge.

Despite his neglect of Nancy, he had never ceased to think of her with a
tenderness which, in his own judgment, signified something more than the
simple fidelity of a married man. Faithful in the technical sense he
had not been, but the casual amours of a young man caused him no
self-reproach; Nancy's image remained without rival in his mind; he had
continued to acknowledge her claims upon him, and, from time to time, to
think of her with a lover's longing. As he only wrote when prompted by
such a mood, his letters, however unsatisfying, were sincere. Various
influences conflicted with this amiable and honourable sentiment. The
desire of independence which had speeded him away from England still
accompanied him on his return; he had never ceased to regret his
marriage, and it seemed to him that, without this legal bondage, it
would have been much easier to play a manly part at the time of Nancy's
becoming a mother. Were she frankly his mistress, he would not be
keeping thus far away when most she needed the consolation of his
presence. The secret marriage condemned him to a course of shame, and
the more he thought of it, the more he marvelled at his deliberate
complicity in such a fraud. When poverty began to make itself felt, when
he was actually hampered in his movements by want of money, this form
of indignity, more than any galling to his pride, intensified the
impatience with which he remembered that he could no longer roam the
world as an adventurer. Any day some trivial accident might oppress him
with the burden of a wife and child who looked to him for their support.
Tarrant the married man, unless he were content to turn simple rogue and
vagabond, must make for himself a place in the money-earning world. His
indolence had no small part in his revolt against the stress of such
a consideration. The climate of the Bahamas by no means tended
to invigorate him, and in the United States he found so much to
observe,--even to enjoy,--that the necessity of effort was kept out
of sight as long as, by one expedient and another, he succeeded in
procuring means to live upon without working.

During the homeward voyage--a trial such as he had never known, amid
squalid discomforts which enraged even more than they disgusted him--his
heart softened in anticipation of a meeting with Nancy, and of the
sight of his child. Apart from his fellow-travellers,--in whom he could
perceive nothing but coarseness and vileness,--he spent the hours in
longing for England and for the home he would make there, in castigating
the flagrant faults of his character, moderating his ambitions, and
endeavouring to find a way out of the numerous grave difficulties with
which his future was beset.

Landed, he rather forgot than discarded these wholesome meditations.
What he had first to do was so very unpleasant, and taxed so rudely his
self-respect, that he insensibly fell back again into the rebellious
temper. Choice there was none; reaching London with a few shillings in
his pocket, of necessity he repaired forthwith to Mr Vawdrey's office in
the City, and made known the straits into which he had fallen.

'Now, my dear fellow,' said Mr. Vawdrey, with his usual good-humour,
'how much have you had of me since you started for the Bahamas?'

'That is hardly a fair question,' Tarrant replied, endeavouring not to
hang his head like an everyday beggar. 'I went out on a commission--'

'True. But after you ceased to be a commissioner?'

'You have lent me seventy pounds. Living in the States is expensive.
What I got for my furniture has gone as well, yet I certainly haven't
been extravagant; and for the last month or two I lived like a tramp.
Will you make my debt to you a round hundred? It shall be repaid, though
I may be a year or two about it.'

The loan was granted, but together with a great deal of unpalatable
counsel. Having found his lodging, Tarrant at once invested ten pounds
in providing himself with a dress suit, and improving his ordinary
attire,--he had sold every garment he could spare in New York. For
the dress suit he had an immediate use; on the very platform of Euston
Station, at his arrival, a chance meeting with one of his old college
friends resulted in an invitation to dine, and, even had not policy
urged him to make the most of such acquaintances, he was in no mood for
rejecting a summons back into the world of civilisation. Postponing the
purposed letter to Nancy (which, had he written it sooner, would have
been very unlike the letter he subsequently sent), he equipped himself
once more as a gentleman, and spent several very enjoyable hours in
looking up the members of his former circle--Hodiernals and others. Only
to Harvey Munden did he confide something of the anxieties which lay
beneath his assumed lightheartedness. Munden was almost the only man he
knew for whom he had a genuine respect.

Renewal of intercourse with people of good social standing made him
more than ever fretful in the thought that he had clogged himself with
marriage. Whatever Nancy's reply to his announcement that he was home
again, he would have read it with discontent. To have the fact forced
upon him (a fact he seriously believed it) that his wife could not be
depended upon even for elementary generosity of thought, was at this
moment especially disastrous; it weighed the balance against his
feelings of justice and humanity, hitherto, no matter how he acted,
always preponderant over the baser issues of character and circumstance.

He stood leaning upon the parapet of Westminster Bridge, his eyes
scanning the dark facade of the Houses of Parliament.

How would the strong, unscrupulous, really ambitious man act in such
a case? What was to prevent him from ignoring the fact that he was
married, and directing his course precisely as he would have done
if poverty had come upon him before his act of supreme foolishness?
Journalism must have been his refuge then, as now; but Society would
have held out to him the hope of every adventurer--a marriage with
some woman whose wealth and connections would clear an upward path
in whatever line he chose to follow. Why not abandon to Nancy the
inheritance it would degrade him to share, and so purchase back his
freedom? The bargain might be made; a strong man would carry it through,
and ultimately triumph by daring all risks.

Having wrought himself to this point of insensate revolt, he quitted his
musing-station on the bridge, and walked away.

Nancy did not write again. There passed four or five days, and Tarrant,
working hard as well as enjoying the pleasures of Society, made up
his mind not to see her. He would leave events to take their course.
A heaviness of heart often troubled him, but he resisted it, and told
himself that he was becoming stronger.

After a long day of writing, he addressed a packet to a certain
periodical, and went out to post it. No sooner had he left the house
than a woman, who had been about to pass him on the pavement, abruptly
turned round and hurriedly walked away. But for this action, he would
not have noticed her; as it was, he recognised the figure, and an
impulse which allowed of no reflection brought him in a moment to
her side. In the ill-lighted street a face could with difficulty be
observed, but Nancy's features were unmistakable to the eye that now
fell upon them.

'Stop, and let me speak to you,' he exclaimed.

She walked only the more quickly, and he was obliged to take her by the
arm.

'What do you want?'

She spoke as if to an insolent stranger, and shook off his grasp.

'If you have nothing to say to me, why are you here?'

'Here? I suppose the streets are free to me?'

'Nothing would bring you to Great College Street if you didn't know that
I was living here. Now that we have met, we must talk.'

'I have nothing at all to say to you.'

'Well, then _I_ will talk.--Come this way; there's a quiet place where
no one will notice us.'

Nancy kept her eyes resolutely averted from him; he, the while, searched
her face with eagerness, as well as the faint rays of the nearest lamp
allowed it.

'If you have anything to say, you must say it here.'

'It's no use, then. Go your way, and I'll go mine.'

He turned, and walked slowly in the direction of Dean's Yard. There
was the sound of a step behind him, and when he had come into the dark,
quiet square, Nancy was there too.

'Better to be reasonable,' said Tarrant, approaching her again. 'I want
to ask you why you answered a well-meant letter with vulgar insult?'

'The insult came from you,' she answered, in a shaking voice.

'What did I say that gave you offence?'

'How can you ask such a question? To write in that way after never
answering my letter for months, leaving me without a word at such a
time, making me think either that you were dead or that you would never
let me hear of you again--'

'I told you it was a mere note, just to let you know I was back. I said
you should hear more when we met.'

'Very well, we have met. What have you to say for yourself?'

'First of all, this. That you are mistaken in supposing I should ever
consent to share your money. The thought was natural to you, no doubt;
but I see things from a different point of view.'

His cold anger completely disguised the emotion stirred in him by
Nancy's presence. Had he not spoken thus, he must have given way to joy
and tenderness. For Nancy seemed more beautiful than the memory he had
retained of her, and even at such a juncture she was far from
exhibiting the gross characteristics attributed to her by his rebellious
imagination.

'Then I don't understand,' were her next words, 'why you wrote to me
again at all.'

'There are many things in me that you don't understand, and can't
understand.'

'Yes, I think so. That's why I see no use in our talking.'

Tarrant was ashamed of what he had said--a meaningless retort, which
covered his inability to speak as his heart prompted.

'At all events I wanted to see you, and it's fortunate you passed just
as I was coming out.'

Nancy would not accept the conciliatory phrase.

'I hadn't the least intention of seeing you,' she replied. 'It was a
curiosity to know where you lived, nothing else. I shall never forgive
you for the way in which you have behaved to me, so you needn't try to
explain yourself.'

'Here and now, I should certainly not try. The only thing I will say
about myself is, that I very much regret not having made known that you
were married to me when plain honesty required it. Now, I look upon it
as something over and done with, as far as I am concerned. I shall never
benefit by the deception--'

She interrupted him.

'How do you know that _I_ shall benefit by it? How can you tell what has
been happening since you last heard from me in America?'

'I have taken it for granted that things are the same.'

'Then you didn't even take measures to have news of me from any one
else?'

'What need? I should always have received any letter you sent.'

'You thought it likely that I should appeal to you if I were in
difficulties.'

He stood silent, glad of the obscurity which made it needless for him to
command his features. At length:

'What is the simple fact? Has your secret been discovered, or not?'

'How does it concern you?'

'Only in this way: that if you are to be dependent upon any one, it must
be upon me.'

Nancy gave a scornful laugh.

'That's very generous, considering your position. But happily you can't
force me to accept your generosity, any more than I can compel you to
take a share of my money.'

'Without the jibe at my poverty,' Tarrant said, 'that is a sufficient
answer. As we can't even pretend to be friendly with each other, I
am very glad there need be no talk of our future relations. You are
provided for, and no doubt will take care not to lose the provision.
If ever you prefer to forget that we are legally bound, I shall be no
obstacle.'

'I have thought of that,' replied Nancy, after a pause, her voice
expressing satisfaction. 'Perhaps we should do better to make the
understanding at once. You are quite free; I should never acknowledge
you as my husband.'

'You seriously mean it?'

'Do I seem to be joking?'

'Very well. I won't say that I should never acknowledge you as my wife;
so far from that, I hold myself responsible whenever you choose to make
any kind of claim upon me. But I shall not dream of interfering with
your liberty. If ever you wish to write to me, you may safely address
to the house at Champion Hill.--And remember always,' he added sternly,
'that it was not I who made such a parting necessary.'

Nancy returned his look through the gloom, and said in like tone:

'I shall do my best never to think of it at all. Fortunately, my time
and my thoughts are occupied.'

'How?' Tarrant could not help asking, as she turned away; for her tone
implied some special significance in the words.

'You have no right to ask anything whatever about me,' came from Nancy,
who was already moving away.

He allowed her to go.

'So it is to be as I wished,' he said to himself, with mock courage. 'So
much the better.'

And he went home to a night of misery.



CHAPTER 6



Not long after the disappearance of Fanny French, Mrs. Damerel called
one day upon Luckworth Crewe at his office in Farringdon Street. Crewe
seldom had business with ladies, and few things could have surprised him
more than a visit from this lady in particular, whom he knew so well by
name, and regarded with such special interest. She introduced herself as
a person wishing to find a good investment for a small capital; but
the half-hour's conversation which followed became in the end almost a
confidential chat. Mrs. Damerel spoke of her nephew Horace Lord, with
whom, she understood, Mr. Crewe was on terms of intimacy; she professed
a grave solicitude on his account, related frankly the unhappy
circumstances which had estranged the young man from her, and ultimately
asked whether Crewe could not make it worth his own while to save Horace
from the shoals of idleness, and pilot him into some safe commercial
haven. This meeting was the first of many between the fashionable lady
and the keen man of affairs. Without a suspicion of how it had come
about, Horace Lord presently found himself an informal partner in
Crewe's business; he invested only a nominal sum, which might be looked
upon as a premium of apprenticeship; but there was an understanding that
at the close of the term of tutelage imposed by his father's will, he
should have the offer of a genuine partnership on very inviting terms.

Horace was not sorry to enter again upon regular occupation. He had
considerably damaged his health in the effort to live up to his ideal
of thwarted passion, and could no longer entertain a hope that Fanny's
escapade was consistent with innocence. Having learnt how money slips
through the fingers of a gentleman with fastidious tastes, he welcomed a
prospect of increased resources, and applied himself with some energy to
learning his new business. But with Mrs. Damerel he utterly refused to
be reconciled, and of his sister he saw very little. Nancy, however,
approved the step he had taken, and said she would be content to know
that all was well with him.

Upon a Sunday morning, when the church bells had ceased to clang,
Luckworth Crewe, not altogether at his ease in garb of flagrant
respectability, sat by the fireside of a pleasant little room conversing
with Mrs. Damerel. Their subject, as usual at the beginning of talk, was
Horace Lord.

'He won't speak of you at all,' said Crewe, in a voice singularly
subdued, sympathetic, respectful. 'I have done all I could, short of
telling him that I know you. He's very touchy still on that old affair.'

'How would he like it,' asked the lady, 'if you told him that we are
acquaintances?'

'Impossible to say. Perhaps it would make no difference one way or
another.'

Mrs. Damerel was strikingly, yet becomingly, arrayed. The past year had
dealt no less gently with her than its predecessors; if anything,
her complexion had gained in brilliancy, perhaps a consequence of the
hygienic precautions due to her fear of becoming stout. A stranger, even
a specialist in the matter, might have doubted whether the fourth decade
lay more than a month or two behind her. So far from seeking to impress
her visitor with a pose of social superiority, she behaved to him as
though his presence honoured as much as it delighted her; look,
tone, bearing, each was a flattery which no obtuseness could fail
to apprehend, and Crewe's countenance proved him anything but
inappreciative. Hitherto she had spoken and listened with her head
drooping in gentle melancholy; now, with a sudden change intended to
signify the native buoyancy of her disposition, she uttered a rippling
laugh, which showed her excellent teeth, and said prettily:

'Poor boy! I must suffer the penalty of having tried to save him from
one of my own sex.--Not,' she added, 'that I foresaw how that poor silly
girl would justify my worst fears of her. Perhaps,' her head drooping
again, 'I ought to reproach myself with what happened.'

'I don't see that at all,' replied Crewe, whose eyes lost nothing of
the exhibition addressed to them. 'Even if you had been the cause of it,
which of course you weren't, I should have said you had done the right
thing. Every one knew what Fanny French must come to.'

'Isn't it sad? A pretty girl--but so ill brought up, I fear. Can you
give me any news of her sister, the one who came here and frightened me
so?'

'Oh, she's going on as usual.'

Crewe checked himself, and showed hesitation.

'She almost threatened me,' Mrs. Damerel pursued, with timid sweetness.
'Do you think she is the kind of person to plot any harm against one?'

'She had better not try it on,' said Crewe, in his natural voice. Then,
as if recollecting himself, he pursued more softly: 'But I was going to
speak of her. You haven't heard that Miss. Lord has taken a position in
the new branch of that Dress Supply Association?'

Mrs. Damerel kept an astonished silence.

'There can't be any doubt of it; I have been told on the best authority.
She is in what they call the "club-room," a superintendent. It's a queer
thing; what can have led her to it?'

'I must make inquiries,' said Mrs. Damerel, with an air of concern. 'How
sad it is, Mr. Crewe, that these young relatives of mine,--almost the
only relatives I have,--should refuse me their confidence and their
affection. Pray, does Horace know of what his sister is doing?'

'I thought I wouldn't speak to him about it until I had seen you.'

'How very kind! How grateful I am to you for your constant
thoughtfulness!'

Why Crewe should have practised such reticence, why it signified
kindness and thoughtfulness to Mrs. Damerel, neither he nor she could
easily have explained. But their eyes met, with diffident admiration on
the one side, and touching amiability on the other. Then they discussed
Nancy's inexplicable behaviour from every point of view; or rather, Mrs.
Damerel discussed it, and her companion made a pretence of doing so.
Crewe's manner had become patently artificial; he either expressed
himself in trivial phrases, which merely avoided silence, or betrayed an
embarrassment, an abstraction, which caused the lady to observe him with
all the acuteness at her command.

You haven't seen her lately?' she asked, when Crewe had been staring at
the window for a minute or two.

'Seen her?--No; not for a long time.'

'I think you told me you haven't called there since Mr. Lord's death?'

'I never was there at all,' he answered abruptly.

'Oh, I remember your saying so. Of course there is no reason why she
shouldn't go into business, if time is heavy on her hands, as I dare
say it may be. So many ladies prefer to have an occupation of that
kind now-a-days. It's a sign of progress; we are getting more
sensible; Society used to have such silly prejudices. Even within my
recollection--how quickly things change!--no lady would have dreamt
of permitting her daughter to take an engagement in a shop or any such
place. Now we have women of title starting as milliners and modistes,
and soon it will be quite a common thing to see one's friends behind the
counter.'

She gave a gay little laugh, in which Crewe joined unmelodiously,--for
he durst not be merry in the note natural to him,--then raised her eyes
in playful appeal.

'If ever I should fall into misfortune, Mr. Crewe, would you put me in
the way of earning my living.'

'You couldn't. You're above all that kind of thing. It's for the rough
and ready sort of women, and I can't say I have much opinion of them.'

'That's a very nice little compliment; but at the same time, it's rather
severe on the women who are practical.--Tell me frankly: Is my--my niece
one of the people you haven't much opinion of?'

Crewe shuffled his feet.

'I wasn't thinking of Miss. Lord.'

'But what is really your opinion of her?' Mrs. Damerel urged softly.

Crewe looked up and down, smiled in a vacant way, and appeared very
uncomfortable.

'May I guess the truth?' said his playful companion.

'No, I'll tell you. I wanted to marry her, and did my best to get her to
promise.'

'I thought so!' She paused on the note of arch satisfaction, and mused.
'How nice of you to confess!--And that's all past and forgotten, is it?'

Never man more unlike himself than the bold advertising-agent in this
colloquy. He was subdued and shy; his usual racy and virile talk had
given place to an insipid mildness. He seemed bent on showing that
the graces of polite society were not so strange to him as one might
suppose. But under Mrs. Damerel's interrogation a restiveness began to
appear in him, and at length he answered in his natural blunt voice:

'Yes, it's all over--and for a good reason.'

The lady's curiosity was still more provoked.

'No,' she exclaimed laughingly, 'I am _not_ going to ask the reason.
That would be presuming too far on friendship.'

Crewe fixed his eyes on a corner of the room, and seemed to look there
for a solution of some difficulty. When the silence had lasted more than
a minute, he began to speak slowly and awkwardly.

'I've half a mind to--in fact, I've been thinking that you ought to
know.'

'The good reason?'

'Yes. You're the only one that could stand in the place of a mother to
