I don't know you very well, but quite well enough to respect you. My
sisters think of you in the same way. I shall do many a base thing in
life, just to get money and reputation; I tell you this that you mayn't
be surprised if anything of that kind comes to your ears. I can't afford
to live as I should like to.'

She looked up at him with a smile.

'People who are going to live unworthily don't declare it in this way.'

'I oughtn't to; a few minutes ago I had no intention of saying such
things. It means I am rather overstrung, I suppose; but it's all true,
unfortunately.'

He rose, and began to run his eye along the shelves nearest to him.

'Well, now I will go, Miss Yule.'

Marian stood up as he approached.

'It's all very well,' he said, smiling, 'for me to encourage my sisters
in the hope that they may earn a living; but suppose I can't even do it
myself? It's by no means certain that I shall make ends meet this year.'

'You have every reason to hope, I think.'

'I like to hear people say that, but it'll mean savage work. When we
were all at Finden last year, I told the girls that it would be another
twelve months before I could support myself. Now I am forced to do
it. And I don't like work; my nature is lazy. I shall never write for
writing's sake, only to make money. All my plans and efforts will have
money in view--all. I shan't allow anything to come in the way of my
material advancement.'

'I wish you every success,' said Marian, without looking at him, and
without a smile.

'Thank you. But that sounds too much like good-bye. I trust we are to be
friends, for all that?'

'Indeed, I hope we may be.'

They shook hands, and he went towards the door. But before opening it,
he asked:

'Did you read that thing of mine in The Current?'

'Yes, I did.'

'It wasn't bad, I think?'

'It seemed to me very clever.'

'Clever--yes, that's the word. It had a success, too. I have as good a
thing half done for the April number, but I've felt too heavy-hearted to
go on with it. The girls shall let you know when they are in town.'

Marian followed him into the passage, and watched him as he opened the
front door. When it had closed, she went back into the study for a few
minutes before rejoining her mother.



CHAPTER IX. INVITA MINERVA

After all, there came a day when Edwin Reardon found himself regularly
at work once more, ticking off his stipulated quantum of manuscript each
four-and-twenty hours. He wrote a very small hand; sixty written slips
of the kind of paper he habitually used would represent--thanks to the
astonishing system which prevails in such matters: large type, wide
spacing, frequency of blank pages--a passable three-hundred-page volume.
On an average he could write four such slips a day; so here we have
fifteen days for the volume, and forty-five for the completed book.

Forty-five days; an eternity in the looking forward. Yet the calculation
gave him a faint-hearted encouragement. At that rate he might have
his book sold by Christmas. It would certainly not bring him a hundred
pounds; seventy-five perhaps. But even that small sum would enable him
to pay the quarter's rent, and then give him a short time, if only two
or three weeks, of mental rest. If such rest could not be obtained all
was at an end with him. He must either find some new means of supporting
himself and his family, or--have done with life and its responsibilities
altogether.

The latter alternative was often enough before him. He seldom slept for
more than two or three consecutive hours in the night, and the time
of wakefulness was often terrible. The various sounds which marked the
stages from midnight to dawn had grown miserably familiar to him; worst
torture to his mind was the chiming and striking of clocks. Two of these
were in general audible, that of Marylebone parish church, and that of
the adjoining workhouse; the latter always sounded several minutes after
its ecclesiastical neighbour, and with a difference of note which seemed
to Reardon very appropriate--a thin, querulous voice, reminding one of
the community it represented. After lying awake for awhile he would hear
quarters sounding; if they ceased before the fourth he was glad, for
he feared to know what time it was. If the hour was complete, he waited
anxiously for its number. Two, three, even four, were grateful; there
was still a long time before he need rise and face the dreaded task, the
horrible four blank slips of paper that had to be filled ere he might
sleep again. But such restfulness was only for a moment; no sooner had
the workhouse bell become silent than he began to toil in his weary
imagination, or else, incapable of that, to vision fearful hazards of
the future. The soft breathing of Amy at his side, the contact of her
warm limbs, often filled him with intolerable dread. Even now he did not
believe that Amy loved him with the old love, and the suspicion was like
a cold weight at his heart that to retain even her wifely sympathy, her
wedded tenderness, he must achieve the impossible.

The impossible; for he could no longer deceive himself with a hope of
genuine success. If he earned a bare living, that would be the utmost.
And with bare livelihood Amy would not, could not, be content.

If he were to die a natural death it would be well for all. His wife and
the child would be looked after; they could live with Mrs Edmund Yule,
and certainly it would not be long before Amy married again, this time a
man of whose competency to maintain her there would be no doubt. His own
behaviour had been cowardly selfishness. Oh yes, she had loved him, had
been eager to believe in him. But there was always that voice of warning
in his mind; he foresaw--he knew--

And if he killed himself? Not here; no lurid horrors for that poor girl
and her relatives; but somewhere at a distance, under circumstances
which would render the recovery of his body difficult, yet would leave
no doubt of his death. Would that, again, be cowardly? The opposite,
when once it was certain that to live meant poverty and wretchedness.
Amy's grief, however sincere, would be but a short trial compared with
what else might lie before her. The burden of supporting her and Willie
would be a very slight one if she went to live in her mother's house.
He considered the whole matter night after night, until perchance it
happened that sleep had pity upon him for an hour before the time of
rising.

Autumn was passing into winter. Dark days, which were always an
oppression to his mind, began to be frequent, and would soon succeed
each other remorselessly. Well, if only each of them represented four
written slips.

Milvain's advice to him had of course proved useless. The sensational
title suggested nothing, or only ragged shapes of incomplete humanity
that fluttered mockingly when he strove to fix them. But he had decided
upon a story of the kind natural to him; a 'thin' story, and one which
it would be difficult to spin into three volumes. His own, at all
events. The title was always a matter for head-racking when the book was
finished; he had never yet chosen it before beginning.

For a week he got on at the desired rate; then came once more the crisis
he had anticipated.

A familiar symptom of the malady which falls upon outwearied
imagination. There were floating in his mind five or six possible
subjects for a book, all dating back to the time when he first began
novel-writing, when ideas came freshly to him. If he grasped desperately
at one of these, and did his best to develop it, for a day or two he
could almost content himself; characters, situations, lines of motive,
were laboriously schemed, and he felt ready to begin writing. But
scarcely had he done a chapter or two when all the structure fell into
flatness. He had made a mistake. Not this story, but that other one, was
what he should have taken. The other one in question, left out of mind
for a time, had come back with a face of new possibility; it invited
him, tempted him to throw aside what he had already written. Good;
now he was in more hopeful train. But a few days, and the experience
repeated itself. No, not this story, but that third one, of which he
had not thought for a long time. How could he have rejected so hopeful a
subject?

For months he had been living in this way; endless circling, perpetual
beginning, followed by frustration. A sign of exhaustion, it of course
made exhaustion more complete. At times he was on the border-land of
imbecility; his mind looked into a cloudy chaos, a shapeless whirl of
nothings. He talked aloud to himself, not knowing that he did so. Little
phrases which indicated dolorously the subject of his preoccupation
often escaped him in the street: 'What could I make of that, now?'
'Well, suppose I made him--?' 'But no, that wouldn't do,' and so on.
It had happened that he caught the eye of some one passing fixed in
surprise upon him; so young a man to be talking to himself in evident
distress!

The expected crisis came, even now that he was savagely determined to
go on at any cost, to write, let the result be what it would. His will
prevailed. A day or two of anguish such as there is no describing to the
inexperienced, and again he was dismissing slip after slip, a sigh of
thankfulness at the completion of each one. It was a fraction of the
whole, a fraction, a fraction.

The ordering of his day was thus. At nine, after breakfast, he sat down
to his desk, and worked till one. Then came dinner, followed by a walk.
As a rule he could not allow Amy to walk with him, for he had to think
over the remainder of the day's toil, and companionship would have been
fatal. At about half-past three he again seated himself; and wrote until
half-past six, when he had a meal. Then once more to work from half-past
seven to ten. Numberless were the experiments he had tried for the day's
division. The slightest interruption of the order for the time being put
him out of gear; Amy durst not open his door to ask however necessary a
question.

Sometimes the three hours' labour of a morning resulted in half-a-dozen
lines, corrected into illegibility. His brain would not work; he could
not recall the simplest synonyms; intolerable faults of composition
drove him mad. He would write a sentence beginning thus: 'She took a
book with a look of--;' or thus: 'A revision of this decision would
have made him an object of derision.' Or, if the period were otherwise
inoffensive, it ran in a rhythmic gallop which was torment to the ear.
All this, in spite of the fact that his former books had been noticeably
good in style. He had an appreciation of shapely prose which made him
scorn himself for the kind of stuff he was now turning out. 'I can't
help it; it must go; the time is passing.'

Things were better, as a rule, in the evening. Occasionally he wrote a
page with fluency which recalled his fortunate years; and then his heart
gladdened, his hand trembled with joy.

Description of locality, deliberate analysis of character or motive,
demanded far too great an effort for his present condition. He kept as
much as possible to dialogue; the space is filled so much more quickly,
and at a pinch one can make people talk about the paltriest incidents of
life.

There came an evening when he opened the door and called to Amy.

'What is it?' she answered from the bedroom. 'I'm busy with Willie.'

'Come as soon as you are free.'

In ten minutes she appeared. There was apprehension on her face; she
feared he was going to lament his inability to work. Instead of that, he
told her joyfully that the first volume was finished.

'Thank goodness!' she exclaimed. 'Are you going to do any more
to-night?'

'I think not--if you will come and sit with me.'

'Willie doesn't seem very well. He can't get to sleep.'

'You would like to stay with him?'

'A little while. I'll come presently.'

She closed the door. Reardon brought a high-backed chair to the
fireside, and allowed himself to forget the two volumes that had still
to be struggled through, in a grateful sense of the portion that
was achieved. In a few minutes it occurred to him that it would be
delightful to read a scrap of the 'Odyssey'; he went to the shelves on
which were his classical books, took the desired volume, and opened it
where Odysseus speaks to Nausicaa:

'For never yet did I behold one of mortals like to thee, neither man nor
woman; I am awed as I look upon thee. In Delos once, hard by the altar
of Apollo, I saw a young palm-tree shooting up with even such a grace.'

Yes, yes; THAT was not written at so many pages a day, with a workhouse
clock clanging its admonition at the poet's ear. How it freshened the
soul! How the eyes grew dim with a rare joy in the sounding of those
nobly sweet hexameters!

Amy came into the room again.

'Listen,' said Reardon, looking up at her with a bright smile. 'Do you
remember the first time that I read you this?'

And he turned the speech into free prose. Amy laughed.

'I remember it well enough. We were alone in the drawing-room; I had
told the others that they must make shift with the dining-room for that
evening. And you pulled the book out of your pocket unexpectedly. I
laughed at your habit of always carrying little books about.'

The cheerful news had brightened her. If she had been summoned to hear
lamentations her voice would not have rippled thus soothingly. Reardon
thought of this, and it made him silent for a minute.

'The habit was ominous,' he said, looking at her with an uncertain
smile. 'A practical literary man doesn't do such things.'

'Milvain, for instance. No.'

With curious frequency she mentioned the name of Milvain. Her
unconsciousness in doing so prevented Reardon from thinking about the
fact; still, he had noted it.

'Did you understand the phrase slightingly?' he asked.

'Slightingly? Yes, a little, of course. It always has that sense on your
lips, I think.'

In the light of this answer he mused upon her readily-offered instance.
True, he had occasionally spoken of Jasper with something less than
respect, but Amy was not in the habit of doing so.

'I hadn't any such meaning just then,' he said. 'I meant quite
simply that my bookish habits didn't promise much for my success as a
novelist.'

'I see. But you didn't think of it in that way at the time.'

He sighed.

'No. At least--no.'

'At least what?'

'Well, no; on the whole I had good hope.'

Amy twisted her fingers together impatiently.

'Edwin, let me tell you something. You are getting too fond of speaking
in a discouraging way. Now, why should you do so? I don't like it. It
has one disagreeable effect on me, and that is, when people ask me about
you, how you are getting on, I don't quite know how to answer. They
can't help seeing that I am uneasy. I speak so differently from what I
used to.'

'Do you, really?'

'Indeed I can't help it. As I say, it's very much your own fault.'

'Well, but granted that I am not of a very sanguine nature, and that I
easily fall into gloomy ways of talk, what is Amy here for?'

'Yes, yes. But--'

'But?'

'I am not here only to try and keep you in good spirits, am I?'

She asked it prettily, with a smile like that of maidenhood.

'Heaven forbid! I oughtn't to have put it in that absolute way. I was
half joking, you know. But unfortunately it's true that I can't be as
light-spirited as I could wish. Does that make you impatient with me?'

'A little. I can't help the feeling, and I ought to try to overcome it.
But you must try on your side as well. Why should you have said that
thing just now?'

'You're quite right. It was needless.'

'A few weeks ago I didn't expect you to be cheerful. Things began
to look about as bad as they could. But now that you've got a volume
finished, there's hope once more.'

Hope? Of what quality? Reardon durst not say what rose in his thoughts.
'A very small, poor hope. Hope of money enough to struggle through
another half year, if indeed enough for that.' He had learnt that Amy
was not to be told the whole truth about anything as he himself saw it.
It was a pity. To the ideal wife a man speaks out all that is in him;
she had infinitely rather share his full conviction than be treated as
one from whom facts must be disguised. She says: 'Let us face the worst
and talk of it together, you and I.' No, Amy was not the ideal wife
from that point of view. But the moment after this half-reproach had
traversed his consciousness he condemned himself; and looked with the
joy of love into her clear eyes.

'Yes, there's hope once more, my dearest. No more gloomy talk to-night!
I have read you something, now you shall read something to me; it is a
long time since I delighted myself with listening to you. What shall it
be?'

'I feel rather too tired to-night.'

'Do you?'

'I have had to look after Willie so much. But read me some more Homer; I
shall be very glad to listen.'

Reardon reached for the book again, but not readily. His face showed
disappointment. Their evenings together had never been the same since
the birth of the child; Willie was always an excuse--valid enough--for
Amy's feeling tired. The little boy had come between him and the mother,
as must always be the case in poor homes, most of all where the poverty
is relative. Reardon could not pass the subject without a remark, but he
tried to speak humorously.

'There ought to be a huge public creche in London. It's monstrous that
an educated mother should have to be nursemaid.'

'But you know very well I think nothing of that. A creche, indeed! No
child of mine should go to any such place.'

There it was. She grudged no trouble on behalf of the child. That was
love; whereas--But then maternal love was a mere matter of course.

'As soon as you get two or three hundred pounds for a book,' she added,
laughing, 'there'll be no need for me to give so much time.'

'Two or three hundred pounds!' He repeated it with a shake of the head.
'Ah, if that were possible!'

'But that's really a paltry sum. What would fifty novelists you could
name say if they were offered three hundred pounds for a book? How much
do you suppose even Markland got for his last?'

'Didn't sell it at all, ten to one. Gets a royalty.'

'Which will bring him five or six hundred pounds before the book ceases
to be talked of.'

'Never mind. I'm sick of the word "pounds."'

'So am I.'

She sighed, commenting thus on her acquiescence.

'But look, Amy. If I try to be cheerful in spite of natural dumps,
wouldn't it be fair for you to put aside thoughts of money?'

'Yes. Read some Homer, dear. Let us have Odysseus down in Hades, and
Ajax stalking past him. Oh, I like that!'

So he read, rather coldly at first, but soon warming. Amy sat with
folded arms, a smile on her lips, her brows knitted to the epic humour.
In a few minutes it was as if no difficulties threatened their life.
Every now and then Reardon looked up from his translating with a
delighted laugh, in which Amy joined.

When he had returned the book to the shelf he stepped behind his wife's
chair, leaned upon it, and put his cheek against hers.

'Amy!'

'Yes, dear?'

'Do you still love me a little?'

'Much more than a little.'

'Though I am sunk to writing a wretched pot-boiler?'

'Is it so bad as all that?'

'Confoundedly bad. I shall be ashamed to see it in print; the proofs
will be a martyrdom.'

'Oh, but why? why?'

'It's the best I can do, dearest. So you don't love me enough to hear
that calmly.'

'If I didn't love you, I might be calmer about it, Edwin. It's dreadful
to me to think of what they will say in the reviews.'

'Curse the reviews!'

His mood had changed on the instant. He stood up with darkened face,
trembling angrily.

'I want you to promise me something, Amy. You won't read a single one
of the notices unless it is forced upon your attention. Now, promise me
that. Neglect them absolutely, as I do. They're not worth a glance of
your eyes. And I shan't be able to bear it if I know you read all the
contempt that will be poured on me.'

'I'm sure I shall be glad enough to avoid it; but other people, our
friends, read it. That's the worst.'

'You know that their praise would be valueless, so have strength to
disregard the blame. Let our friends read and talk as much as they like.
Can't you console yourself with the thought that I am not contemptible,
though I may have been forced to do poor work?'

'People don't look at it in that way.'

'But, darling,' he took her hands strongly in his own, 'I want you to
disregard other people. You and I are surely everything to each other?
Are you ashamed of me, of me myself?'

'No, not ashamed of you. But I am sensitive to people's talk and
opinions.'

'But that means they make you feel ashamed of me. What else?'

There was silence.

'Edwin, if you find you are unable to do good work, you mustn't do bad.
We must think of some other way of making a living.'

'Have you forgotten that you urged me to write a trashy sensational
story?'

She coloured and looked annoyed.

'You misunderstood me. A sensational story needn't be trash. And then,
you know, if you had tried something entirely unlike your usual work,
that would have been excuse enough if people had called it a failure.'

'People! People!'

'We can't live in solitude, Edwin, though really we are not far
from it.' He did not dare to make any reply to this. Amy was so
exasperatingly womanlike in avoiding the important issue to which he
tried to confine her; another moment, and his tone would be that of
irritation. So he turned away and sat down to his desk, as if he had
some thought of resuming work.

'Will you come and have some supper?' Amy asked, rising.

'I have been forgetting that to-morrow morning's chapter has still to be
thought out.'

'Edwin, I can't think this book will really be so poor. You couldn't
possibly give all this toil for no result.'

'No; not if I were in sound health. But I am far from it.'

'Come and have supper with me, dear, and think afterwards.'

He turned and smiled at her.

'I hope I shall never be able to resist an invitation from you, sweet.'

The result of all this was, of course, that he sat down in anything but
the right mood to his work next morning. Amy's anticipation of criticism
had made it harder than ever for him to labour at what he knew to be
bad. And, as ill-luck would have it, in a day or two he caught his
first winter's cold. For several years a succession of influenzas,
sore-throats, lumbagoes, had tormented him from October to May; in
planning his present work, and telling himself that it must be finished
before Christmas, he had not lost sight of these possible interruptions.
But he said to himself: 'Other men have worked hard in seasons of
illness; I must do the same.' All very well, but Reardon did not belong
to the heroic class. A feverish cold now put his powers and resolution
to the test. Through one hideous day he nailed himself to the desk--and
wrote a quarter of a page. The next day Amy would not let him rise from
bed; he was wretchedly ill. In the night he had talked about his work
deliriously, causing her no slight alarm.

'If this goes on,' she said to him in the morning, 'you'll have brain
fever. You must rest for two or three days.'

'Teach me how to. I wish I could.'

Rest had indeed become out of the question. For two days he could not
write, but the result upon his mind was far worse than if he had been at
the desk. He looked a haggard creature when he again sat down with the
accustomed blank slip before him.

The second volume ought to have been much easier work than the first; it
proved far harder. Messieurs and mesdames the critics are wont to point
out the weakness of second volumes; they are generally right, simply
because a story which would have made a tolerable book (the common run
of stories) refuses to fill three books. Reardon's story was in itself
weak, and this second volume had to consist almost entirely of laborious
padding. If he wrote three slips a day he did well.

And the money was melting, melting, despite Amy's efforts at economy.
She spent as little as she could; not a luxury came into their home;
articles of clothing all but indispensable were left unpurchased. But
to what purpose was all this? Impossible, now, that the book should be
finished and sold before the money had all run out.

At the end of November, Reardon said to his wife one morning:

'To-morrow I finish the second volume.'

'And in a week,' she replied, 'we shan't have a shilling left.'

He had refrained from making inquiries, and Amy had forborne to tell
him the state of things, lest it should bring him to a dead stop in his
writing. But now they must needs discuss their position.

'In three weeks I can get to the end,' said Reardon, with unnatural
calmness. 'Then I will go personally to the publishers, and beg them to
advance me something on the manuscript before they have read it.'

'Couldn't you do that with the first two volumes?'

'No, I can't; indeed I can't. The other thing will be bad enough; but to
beg on an incomplete book, and such a book--I can't!'

There were drops on his forehead.

'They would help you if they knew,' said Amy in a low voice.

'Perhaps; I can't say. They can't help every poor devil. No; I will sell
some books. I can pick out fifty or sixty that I shan't much miss.'

Amy knew what a wrench this would be. The imminence of distress seemed
to have softened her.

'Edwin, let me take those two volumes to the publishers, and ask--'

'Heavens! no. That's impossible. Ten to one you will be told that my
work is of such doubtful value that they can't offer even a guinea till
the whole book has been considered. I can't allow you to go, dearest.
This morning I'll choose some books that I can spare, and after dinner
I'll ask a man to come and look at them. Don't worry yourself; I can
finish in three weeks, I'm sure I can. If I can get you three or four
pounds you could make it do, couldn't you?'

'Yes.'

She averted her face as she spoke.

'You shall have that.' He still spoke very quietly. 'If the books won't
bring enough, there's my watch--oh, lots of things.'

He turned abruptly away, and Amy went on with her household work.



CHAPTER X. THE FRIENDS OF THE FAMILY

It was natural that Amy should hint dissatisfaction with the loneliness
in which her days were mostly spent. She had never lived in a large
circle of acquaintances; the narrowness of her mother's means restricted
the family to intercourse with a few old friends and such new ones as
were content with teacup entertainment; but her tastes were social,
and the maturing process which followed upon her marriage made her more
conscious of this than she had been before. Already she had allowed her
husband to understand that one of her strongest motives in marrying
him was the belief that he would achieve distinction. At the time
she doubtless thought of his coming fame only--or principally--as it
concerned their relations to each other; her pride in him was to be one
phase of her love. Now she was well aware that no degree of distinction
in her husband would be of much value to her unless she had the pleasure
of witnessing its effect upon others; she must shine with reflected
light before an admiring assembly.

The more conscious she became of this requirement of her nature, the
more clearly did she perceive that her hopes had been founded on an
error. Reardon would never be a great man; he would never even occupy
a prominent place in the estimation of the public. The two things, Amy
knew, might be as different as light and darkness; but in the grief of
her disappointment she would rather have had him flare into a worthless
popularity than flicker down into total extinction, which it almost
seemed was to be his fate.

She knew so well how 'people' were talking of him and her. Even her
unliterary acquaintances understood that Reardon's last novel had been
anything but successful, and they must of course ask each other how
the Reardons were going to live if the business of novel-writing proved
unremunerative. Her pride took offence at the mere thought of such
conversations. Presently she would become an object of pity; there would
be talk of 'poor Mrs Reardon.' It was intolerable.

So during the last half year she had withheld as much as possible from
the intercourse which might have been one of her chief pleasures. And to
disguise the true cause she made pretences which were a satire upon her
state of mind--alleging that she had devoted herself to a serious course
of studies, that the care of house and child occupied all the time she
could spare from her intellectual pursuits. The worst of it was, she
had little faith in the efficacy of these fictions; in uttering them she
felt an unpleasant warmth upon her cheeks, and it was not difficult to
detect a look of doubt in the eyes of the listener. She grew angry
with herself for being dishonest, and with her husband for making such
dishonesty needful.

The female friend with whom she had most trouble was Mrs Carter. You
remember that on the occasion of Reardon's first meeting with his future
wife, at the Grosvenor Gallery, there were present his friend Carter
and a young lady who was shortly to bear the name of that spirited
young man. The Carters had now been married about a year; they lived
in Bayswater, and saw much of a certain world which imitates on a lower
plane the amusements and affectations of society proper. Mr Carter was
still secretary to the hospital where Reardon had once earned his twenty
shillings a week, but by voyaging in the seas of charitable enterprise
he had come upon supplementary sources of income; for instance, he held
the post of secretary to the Barclay Trust, a charity whose moderate
funds were largely devoted to the support of gentlemen engaged in
administering it. This young man, with his air of pleasing vivacity, had
early ingratiated himself with the kind of people who were likely to be
of use to him; he had his reward in the shape of offices which are only
procured through private influence. His wife was a good-natured, lively,
and rather clever girl; she had a genuine regard for Amy, and much
respect for Reardon. Her ambition was to form a circle of distinctly
intellectual acquaintances, and she was constantly inviting the Reardons
to her house; a real live novelist is not easily drawn into the world
where Mrs Carter had her being, and it annoyed her that all attempts to
secure Amy and her husband for five-o'clock teas and small parties had
of late failed.

On the afternoon when Reardon had visited a second-hand bookseller with
a view of raising money--he was again shut up in his study, dolorously
at work--Amy was disturbed by the sound of a visitor's rat-tat; the
little servant went to the door, and returned followed by Mrs Carter.

Under the best of circumstances it was awkward to receive any but
intimate friends during the hours when Reardon sat at his desk. The
little dining-room (with its screen to conceal the kitchen range)
offered nothing more than homely comfort; and then the servant had to
be disposed of by sending her into the bedroom to take care of Willie.
Privacy, in the strict sense, was impossible, for the servant
might listen at the door (one room led out of the other) to all the
conversation that went on; yet Amy could not request her visitors to
speak in a low tone. For the first year these difficulties had not
been felt; Reardon made a point of leaving the front room at his wife's
disposal from three to six; it was only when dread of the future began
to press upon him that he sat in the study all day long. You see how
complicated were the miseries of the situation; one torment involved
another, and in every quarter subjects of discontent were multiplied.

Mrs Carter would have taken it ill had she known that Amy did not
regard her as strictly an intimate. They addressed each other by their
Christian names, and conversed without ceremony; but Amy was always
dissatisfied when the well-dressed young woman burst with laughter and
animated talk into this abode of concealed poverty. Edith was not the
kind of person with whom one can quarrel; she had a kind heart, and was
never disagreeably pretentious. Had circumstances allowed it, Amy would
have given frank welcome to such friendship; she would have been glad
to accept as many invitations as Edith chose to offer. But at present
it did her harm to come in contact with Mrs Carter; it made her envious,
cold to her husband, resentful against fate.

'Why can't she leave me alone?' was the thought that rose in her mind as
Edith entered. 'I shall let her see that I don't want her here.'

'Your husband at work?' Edith asked, with a glance in the direction of
the study, as soon as they had exchanged kisses and greetings.

'Yes, he is busy.'

'And you are sitting alone, as usual. I feared you might be out; an
afternoon of sunshine isn't to be neglected at this time of year.'

'Is there sunshine?' Amy inquired coldly.

'Why, look! Do you mean to say you haven't noticed it? What a comical
person you are sometimes! I suppose you have been over head and ears in
books all day. How is Willie?'

'Very well, thank you.'

'Mayn't I see him?'

'If you like.'

Amy stepped to the bedroom door and bade the servant bring Willie for
exhibition. Edith, who as yet had no child of her own, always showed the
most flattering admiration of this infant; it was so manifestly sincere
that the mother could not but be moved to a grateful friendliness
whenever she listened to its expression. Even this afternoon the usual
effect followed when Edith had made a pretty and tender fool of herself
for several minutes. Amy bade the servant make tea.

At this moment the door from the passage opened, and Reardon looked in.

'Well, if this isn't marvellous!' cried Edith. 'I should as soon have
expected the heavens to fall!'

'As what?' asked Reardon, with a pale smile.

'As you to show yourself when I am here.'

'I should like to say that I came on purpose to see you, Mrs Carter,
but it wouldn't be true. I'm going out for an hour, so that you can take
possession of the other room if you like, Amy.'

'Going out?' said Amy, with a look of surprise.

'Nothing--nothing. I mustn't stay.'

He just inquired of Mrs Carter how her husband was, and withdrew. The
door of the flat was heard to close after him.

'Let us go into the study, then,' said Amy, again in rather a cold
voice.

On Reardon's desk were lying slips of blank paper. Edith, approaching on
tiptoe with what was partly make believe, partly genuine, awe, looked at
the literary apparatus, then turned with a laugh to her friend.

'How delightful it must be to sit down and write about people one has
invented! Ever since I have known you and Mr Reardon I have been tempted
to try if I couldn't write a story.'

'Have you?'

'And I'm sure I don't know how you can resist the temptation. I feel
sure you could write books almost as clever as your husband's.'

'I have no intention of trying.'

'You don't seem very well to-day, Amy.'

'Oh, I think I am as well as usual.'

She guessed that her husband was once more brought to a standstill, and
this darkened her humour again.

'One of my reasons for coming,' said Edith, 'was to beg and entreat and
implore you and Mr Reardon to dine with us next Wednesday. Now, don't
put on such a severe face! Are you engaged that evening?'

'Yes; in the ordinary way. Edwin can't possibly leave his work.'

'But for one poor evening! It's such ages since we saw you.'

'I'm very sorry. I don't think we shall ever be able to accept
invitations in future.'

Amy spoke thus at the prompting of a sudden impulse. A minute ago, no
such definite declaration was in her mind.

'Never?' exclaimed Edith. 'But why? Whatever do you mean?'

'We find that social engagements consume too much time,' Amy replied,
her explanation just as much of an impromptu as the announcement had
been. 'You see, one must either belong to society or not. Married people
can't accept an occasional invitation from friends and never do their
social duty in return.

We have decided to withdraw altogether--at all events for the present. I
shall see no one except my relatives.'

Edith listened with a face of astonishment.

'You won't even see ME?' she exclaimed.

'Indeed, I have no wish to lose your friendship. Yet I am ashamed to ask
you to come here when I can never return your visits.'

'Oh, please don't put it in that way! But it seems so very strange.'

Edith could not help conjecturing the true significance of this resolve.
But, as is commonly the case with people in easy circumstances, she
found it hard to believe that her friends were so straitened as to
have a difficulty in supporting the ordinary obligations of a civilised
state.

'I know how precious your husband's time is,' she added, as if to remove
the effect of her last remark. 'Surely, there's no harm in my saying--we
know each other well enough--you wouldn't think it necessary to devote
an evening to entertaining us just because you had given us the pleasure
of your company. I put it very stupidly, but I'm sure you understand me,
Amy. Don't refuse just to come to our house now and then.'

'I'm afraid we shall have to be consistent, Edith.'

'But do you think this is a WISE thing to do?'

'Wise?'

'You know what you once told me, about how necessary it was for a
novelist to study all sorts of people. How can Mr Reardon do this if he
shuts himself up in the house? I should have thought he would find it
necessary to make new acquaintances.'

'As I said,' returned Amy, 'it won't be always like this. For the
present, Edwin has quite enough "material."'

She spoke distantly; it irritated her to have to invent excuses for the
sacrifice she had just imposed on herself. Edith sipped the tea which
had been offered her, and for a minute kept silence.

'When will Mr Reardon's next book be published?' she asked at length.

'I'm sure I don't know. Not before the spring.'

'I shall look so anxiously for it. Whenever I meet new people I always
turn the conversation to novels, just for the sake of asking them if
they know your husband's books.'

She laughed merrily.

'Which is seldom the case, I should think,' said Amy, with a smile of
indifference.

'Well, my dear, you don't expect ordinary novel-readers to know about Mr
Reardon. I wish my acquaintances were a better kind of people; then, of
course, I should hear of his books more often. But one has to make the
best of such society as offers. If you and your husband forsake me, I
shall feel it a sad loss; I shall indeed.'

Amy gave a quick glance at the speaker's face.

'Oh, we must be friends just the same,' she said, more naturally than
she had spoken hitherto. 'But don't ask us to come and dine just now.
All through this winter we shall be very busy, both of us. Indeed, we
have decided not to accept any invitations at all.'

'Then, so long as you let me come here now and then, I must give in. I
promise not to trouble you with any more complaining. But how you can
live such a life I don't know. I consider myself more of a reader than
women generally are, and I should be mortally offended if anyone called
me frivolous; but I must have a good deal of society. Really and truly,
I can't live without it.'

'No?' said Amy, with a smile which meant more than Edith could
interpret. It seemed slightly condescending.

'There's no knowing; perhaps if I had married a literary man---' She
paused, smiling and musing. 'But then I haven't, you see.' She laughed.
'Albert is anything but a bookworm, as you know.'

'You wouldn't wish him to be.'

'Oh no! Not a bookworm. To be sure, we suit each other very well indeed.
He likes society just as much as I do. It would be the death of him if
he didn't spend three-quarters of every day with lively people.'

'That's rather a large portion. But then you count yourself among the
lively ones.'

They exchanged looks, and laughed together.

'Of course you think me rather silly to want to talk so much with silly
people,' Edith went on. 'But then there's generally some amusement to
be got, you know. I don't take life quite so seriously as you do. People
are people, after all; it's good fun to see how they live and hear how
they talk.'

Amy felt that she was playing a sorry part. She thought of sour grapes,
and of the fox who had lost his tail. Worst of all, perhaps Edith
suspected the truth. She began to make inquiries about common
acquaintances, and fell into an easier current of gossip.

A quarter of an hour after the visitor's departure Reardon came back.
Amy had guessed aright; the necessity of selling his books weighed upon
him so that for the present he could do nothing. The evening was spent
gloomily, with very little conversation.

Next day came the bookseller to make his inspection. Reardon had
chosen out and ranged upon a table nearly a hundred volumes. With a few
exceptions, they had been purchased second-hand. The tradesman examined
them rapidly.

'What do you ask?' he inquired, putting his head aside.

'I prefer that you should make an offer,' Reardon replied, with the
helplessness of one who lives remote from traffic.

'I can't say more than two pounds ten.'

'That is at the rate of sixpence a volume---?'

'To me that's about the average value of books like these.'

Perhaps the offer was a fair one; perhaps it was not. Reardon had
neither time nor spirit to test the possibilities of the market; he was
ashamed to betray his need by higgling.

'I'll take it,' he said, in a matter-of-fact voice.

A messenger was sent for the books that afternoon. He stowed them
skilfully in two bags, and carried them downstairs to a cart that was
waiting.

Reardon looked at the gaps left on his shelves. Many of those vanished
volumes were dear old friends to him; he could have told you where he
had picked them up and when; to open them recalled a past moment of
intellectual growth, a mood of hope or despondency, a stage of struggle.
In most of them his name was written, and there were often pencilled
notes in the margin. Of course he had chosen from among the most
valuable he possessed; such a multitude must else have been sold to make
this sum of two pounds ten. Books are cheap, you know. At need, one can
buy a Homer for fourpence, a Sophocles for sixpence. It was not rubbish
that he had accumulated at so small expenditure, but the library of a
poor student--battered bindings, stained pages, supplanted editions.
He loved his books, but there was something he loved more, and when Amy
glanced at him with eyes of sympathy he broke into a cheerful laugh.

'I'm only sorry they have gone for so little. Tell me when the money
is nearly at an end again, and you shall have more. It's all right; the
novel will be done soon.'

And that night he worked until twelve o'clock, doggedly, fiercely.

The next day was Sunday. As a rule he made it a day of rest, and almost
perforce, for the depressing influence of Sunday in London made work too
difficult. Then, it was the day on which he either went to see his own
particular friends or was visited by them.

'Do you expect anyone this evening?' Amy inquired.

'Biffen will look in, I dare say. Perhaps Milvain.'

'I think I shall take Willie to mother's. I shall be back before eight.'

'Amy, don't say anything about the books.'

'No, no.'

'I suppose they always ask you when we think of removing over the way?'

He pointed in a direction that suggested Marylebone Workhouse. Amy tried
to laugh, but a woman with a child in her arms has no keen relish for
such jokes.

'I don't talk to them about our affairs,' she said.

'That's best.'

She left home about three o'clock, the servant going with her to carry
the child.

At five a familiar knock sounded through the flat; it was a heavy rap
followed by half-a-dozen light ones, like a reverberating echo, the last
stroke scarcely audible. Reardon laid down his book, but kept his pipe
in his mouth, and went to the door. A tall, thin man stood there, with a
slouch hat and long grey overcoat. He shook hands silently, hung his hat
in the passage, and came forward into the study.

His name was Harold Biffen, and, to judge from his appearance, he did
not belong to the race of common mortals. His excessive meagreness would
all but have qualified him to enter an exhibition in the capacity of
living skeleton, and the garments which hung upon this framework would
perhaps have sold for three-and-sixpence at an old-clothes dealer's. But
the man was superior to these accidents of flesh and raiment. He had
a fine face: large, gentle eyes, nose slightly aquiline, small and
delicate mouth. Thick black hair fell to his coat-collar; he wore a
