heavy moustache and a full beard. In his gait there was a singular
dignity; only a man of cultivated mind and graceful character could move
and stand as he did.

His first act on entering the room was to take from his pocket a pipe,
a pouch, a little tobacco-stopper, and a box of matches, all of which
he arranged carefully on a corner of the central table. Then he drew
forward a chair and seated himself.

'Take your top-coat off;' said Reardon.

'Thanks, not this evening.'

'Why the deuce not?'

'Not this evening, thanks.'

The reason, as soon as Reardon sought for it, was obvious. Biffen had
no ordinary coat beneath the other. To have referred to this fact would
have been indelicate; the novelist of course understood it, and smiled,
but with no mirth.

'Let me have your Sophocles,' were the visitor's next words.

Reardon offered him a volume of the Oxford Pocket Classics.

'I prefer the Wunder, please.'

'It's gone, my boy.'

'Gone?'

'Wanted a little cash.'

Biffen uttered a sound in which remonstrance and sympathy were blended.

'I'm sorry to hear that; very sorry. Well, this must do. Now, I want to
know how you scan this chorus in the "Oedipus Rex."'

Reardon took the volume, considered, and began to read aloud with metric
emphasis.

'Choriambics, eh?' cried the other. 'Possible, of course; but treat them
as Ionics a minore with an anacrusis, and see if they don't go better.'

He involved himself in terms of pedantry, and with such delight that his
eyes gleamed. Having delivered a technical lecture, he began to read in
illustration, producing quite a different effect from that of the
rhythm as given by his friend. And the reading was by no means that of a
pedant, rather of a poet.

For half an hour the two men talked Greek metres as if they lived in a
world where the only hunger known could be satisfied by grand or sweet
cadences.

They had first met in an amusing way. Not long after the publication of
his book 'On Neutral Ground' Reardon was spending a week at Hastings.
A rainy day drove him to the circulating library, and as he was looking
along the shelves for something readable a voice near at hand asked the
attendant if he had anything 'by Edwin Reardon.' The novelist turned in
astonishment; that any casual mortal should inquire for his books seemed
incredible. Of course there was nothing by that author in the library,
and he who had asked the question walked out again. On the morrow
Reardon encountered this same man at a lonely part of the shore; he
looked at him, and spoke a word or two of common civility; they got into
conversation, with the result that Edwin told the story of yesterday.
The stranger introduced himself as Harold Biffen, an author in a small
way, and a teacher whenever he could get pupils; an abusive review had
interested him in Reardon's novels, but as yet he knew nothing of them
but the names.

Their tastes were found to be in many respects sympathetic, and after
returning to London they saw each other frequently. Biffen was always in
dire poverty, and lived in the oddest places; he had seen harder trials
than even Reardon himself. The teaching by which he partly lived was of
a kind quite unknown to the respectable tutorial world. In these days
of examinations, numbers of men in a poor position--clerks
chiefly--conceive a hope that by 'passing' this, that, or the other
formal test they may open for themselves a new career. Not a few such
persons nourish preposterous ambitions; there are warehouse clerks
privately preparing (without any means or prospect of them) for a
call to the Bar, drapers' assistants who 'go in' for the preliminary
examination of the College of Surgeons, and untaught men innumerable who
desire to procure enough show of education to be eligible for a curacy.
Candidates of this stamp frequently advertise in the newspapers for
cheap tuition, or answer advertisements which are intended to appeal to
them; they pay from sixpence to half-a-crown an hour--rarely as much as
the latter sum. Occasionally it happened that Harold Biffen had three or
four such pupils in hand, and extraordinary stories he could draw from
his large experience in this sphere.

Then as to his authorship.--But shortly after the discussion of Greek
metres he fell upon the subject of his literary projects, and, by no
means for the first time, developed the theory on which he worked.

'I have thought of a new way of putting it. What I really aim at is an
absolute realism in the sphere of the ignobly decent. The field, as I
understand it, is a new one; I don't know any writer who has treated
ordinary vulgar life with fidelity and seriousness. Zola writes
deliberate tragedies; his vilest figures become heroic from the
place they fill in a strongly imagined drama. I want to deal with the
essentially unheroic, with the day-to-day life of that vast majority of
people who are at the mercy of paltry circumstance. Dickens understood
the possibility of such work, but his tendency to melodrama on the one
hand, and his humour on the other, prevented him from thinking of it. An
instance, now. As I came along by Regent's Park half an hour ago a man
and a girl were walking close in front of me, love-making; I passed them
slowly and heard a good deal of their talk--it was part of the situation
that they should pay no heed to a stranger's proximity. Now, such
a love-scene as that has absolutely never been written down; it was
entirely decent, yet vulgar to the nth power. Dickens would have made
it ludicrous--a gross injustice. Other men who deal with low-class life
would perhaps have preferred idealising it--an absurdity. For my
own part, I am going to reproduce it verbatim, without one single
impertinent suggestion of any point of view save that of honest
reporting. The result will be something unutterably tedious. Precisely.
That is the stamp of the ignobly decent life. If it were anything but
tedious it would be untrue. I speak, of course, of its effect upon the
ordinary reader.'

'I couldn't do it,' said Reardon.

'Certainly you couldn't. You--well, you are a psychological realist in
the sphere of culture. You are impatient of vulgar circumstances.'

'In a great measure because my life has been martyred by them.'

'And for that very same reason I delight in them,' cried Biffen.
'You are repelled by what has injured you; I am attracted by it. This
divergence is very interesting; but for that, we should have resembled
each other so closely. You know that by temper we are rabid idealists,
both of us.'

'I suppose so.'

'But let me go on. I want, among other things, to insist upon the
fateful power of trivial incidents. No one has yet dared to do this
seriously. It has often been done in farce, and that's why farcical
writing so often makes one melancholy. You know my stock instances
of the kind of thing I mean. There was poor Allen, who lost the most
valuable opportunity of his life because he hadn't a clean shirt to put
on; and Williamson, who would probably have married that rich girl but
for the grain of dust that got into his eye, and made him unable to say
or do anything at the critical moment.'

Reardon burst into a roar of laughter.

'There you are!' cried Biffen, with friendly annoyance. 'You take the
conventional view. If you wrote of these things you would represent them
as laughable.'

'They are laughable,' asserted the other, 'however serious to the
persons concerned. The mere fact of grave issues in life depending on
such paltry things is monstrously ludicrous. Life is a huge farce, and
the advantage of possessing a sense of humour is that it enables one to
defy fate with mocking laughter.'

'That's all very well, but it isn't an original view. I am not lacking
in sense of humour, but I prefer to treat these aspects of life from
an impartial standpoint. The man who laughs takes the side of a cruel
omnipotence, if one can imagine such a thing.

I want to take no side at all; simply to say, Look, this is the kind of
thing that happens.'

'I admire your honesty, Biffen,' said Reardon, sighing. 'You will
never sell work of this kind, yet you have the courage to go on with it
because you believe in it.'

'I don't know; I may perhaps sell it some day.'

'In the meantime,' said Reardon, laying down his pipe, 'suppose we eat a
morsel of something. I'm rather hungry.'

In the early days of his marriage Reardon was wont to offer the friends
who looked in on Sunday evening a substantial supper; by degrees the
meal had grown simpler, until now, in the depth of his poverty, he made
no pretence of hospitable entertainment. It was only because he knew
that Biffen as often as not had nothing whatever to eat that he did not
hesitate to offer him a slice of bread and butter and a cup of tea. They
went into the back room, and over the Spartan fare continued to discuss
aspects of fiction.

'I shall never,' said Biffen, 'write anything like a dramatic scene.
Such things do happen in life, but so very rarely that they are nothing
to my purpose. Even when they happen, by-the-bye, it is in a shape that
would be useless to the ordinary novelist; he would have to cut away
this circumstance, and add that. Why? I should like to know. Such
conventionalism results from stage necessities. Fiction hasn't yet
outgrown the influence of the stage on which it originated. Whatever a
man writes FOR EFFECT is wrong and bad.'

'Only in your view. There may surely exist such a thing as the ART of
fiction.'

'It is worked out. We must have a rest from it. You, now--the best
things you have done are altogether in conflict with novelistic
conventionalities. It was because that blackguard review of "On Neutral
Ground" clumsily hinted this that I first thought of you with interest.
No, no; let us copy life. When the man and woman are to meet for a
great scene of passion, let it all be frustrated by one or other of
them having a bad cold in the head, and so on. Let the pretty girl get
a disfiguring pimple on her nose just before the ball at which she is
going to shine. Show the numberless repulsive features of common decent
life. Seriously, coldly; not a hint of facetiousness, or the thing
becomes different.'

About eight o'clock Reardon heard his wife's knock at the door. On
opening he saw not only Amy and the servant, the latter holding Willie
in her arms, but with them Jasper Milvain.

'I have been at Mrs Yule's,' Jasper explained as he came in. 'Have you
anyone here?'

'Biffen.'

'Ah, then we'll discuss realism.'

'That's over for the evening. Greek metres also.'

'Thank Heaven!'

The three men seated themselves with joking and laughter, and the smoke
of their pipes gathered thickly in the little room. It was half an
hour before Amy joined them. Tobacco was no disturbance to her, and
she enjoyed the kind of talk that was held on these occasions; but
it annoyed her that she could no longer play the hostess at a merry
supper-table.

'Why ever are you sitting in your overcoat, Mr Biffen?' were her first
words when she entered.

'Please excuse me, Mrs Reardon. It happens to be more convenient this
evening.'

She was puzzled, but a glance from her husband warned her not to pursue
the subject.

Biffen always behaved to Amy with a sincerity of respect which had made
him a favourite with her. To him, poor fellow, Reardon seemed supremely
blessed. That a struggling man of letters should have been able to
marry, and such a wife, was miraculous in Biffen's eyes. A woman's love
was to him the unattainable ideal; already thirty-five years old, he had
no prospect of ever being rich enough to assure himself a daily dinner;
marriage was wildly out of the question. Sitting here, he found it very
difficult not to gaze at Amy with uncivil persistency. Seldom in his
life had he conversed with educated women, and the sound of this clear
voice was always more delightful to him than any music.

Amy took a place near to him, and talked in her most charming way of
such things as she knew interested him. Biffen's deferential attitude
as he listened and replied was in strong contrast with the careless
ease which marked Jasper Milvain. The realist would never smoke in Amy's
presence, but Jasper puffed jovial clouds even whilst she was conversing
with him.

'Whelpdale came to see me last night,' remarked Milvain, presently.
'His novel is refused on all hands. He talks of earning a living as a
commission agent for some sewing-machine people.'

'I can't understand how his book should be positively refused,' said
Reardon. 'The last wasn't altogether a failure.'

'Very nearly. And this one consists of nothing but a series of
conversations between two people. It is really a dialogue, not a novel
at all. He read me some twenty pages, and I no longer wondered that he
couldn't sell it.'

'Oh, but it has considerable merit,' put in Biffen. 'The talk is
remarkably true.'

'But what's the good of talk that leads to nothing?' protested Jasper.

'It's a bit of real life.'

'Yes, but it has no market value. You may write what you like, so long
as people are willing to read you. Whelpdale's a clever fellow, but he
can't hit a practical line.'

'Like some other people I have heard of;' said Reardon, laughing.

'But the odd thing is, that he always strikes one as practical-minded.
Don't you feel that, Mrs Reardon?'

He and Amy talked for a few minutes, and Reardon, seemingly lost in
meditation, now and then observed them from the corner of his eye.

At eleven o'clock husband and wife were alone again.

'You don't mean to say,' exclaimed Amy, 'that Biffen has sold his coat?'

'Or pawned it.'

'But why not the overcoat?'

'Partly, I should think, because it's the warmer of the two; partly,
perhaps, because the other would fetch more.'

'That poor man will die of starvation, some day, Edwin.'

'I think it not impossible.'

'I hope you gave him something to eat?'

'Oh yes. But I could see he didn't like to take as much as he wanted.
I don't think of him with so much pity as I used that's a result of
suffering oneself.'

Amy set her lips and sighed.



CHAPTER XI. RESPITE

The last volume was written in fourteen days. In this achievement
Reardon rose almost to heroic pitch, for he had much to contend with
beyond the mere labour of composition. Scarcely had he begun when a
sharp attack of lumbago fell upon him; for two or three days it was
torture to support himself at the desk, and he moved about like a
cripple. Upon this ensued headaches, sore-throat, general enfeeblement.
And before the end of the fortnight it was necessary to think of raising
another small sum of money; he took his watch to the pawnbroker's (you
can imagine that it would not stand as security for much), and sold a
few more books. All this notwithstanding, here was the novel at length
finished. When he had written 'The End' he lay back, closed his eyes,
and let time pass in blankness for a quarter of an hour.

It remained to determine the title. But his brain refused another
effort; after a few minutes' feeble search he simply took the name of
the chief female character, Margaret Home. That must do for the book.
Already, with the penning of the last word, all its scenes, personages,
dialogues had slipped away into oblivion; he knew and cared nothing more
about them.

'Amy, you will have to correct the proofs for me. Never as long as I
live will I look upon a page of this accursed novel. It has all but
killed me.'

'The point is,' replied Amy, 'that here we have it complete. Pack it up
and take it to the publishers' to-morrow morning.'

'I will.'

'And--you will ask them to advance you a few pounds?'

'I must.'

But that undertaking was almost as hard to face as a rewriting of
the last volume would have been. Reardon had such superfluity of
sensitiveness that, for his own part, he would far rather have gone
hungry than ask for money not legally his due. To-day there was no
choice. In the ordinary course of business it would be certainly a month
before he heard the publishers' terms, and perhaps the Christmas season
might cause yet more delay. Without borrowing, he could not provide for
the expenses of more than another week or two.

His parcel under his arm, he entered the ground-floor office, and
desired to see that member of the firm with whom he had previously had
personal relations. This gentleman was not in town; he would be away for
a few days. Reardon left the manuscript, and came out into the street
again.

He crossed, and looked up at the publishers' windows from the opposite
pavement. 'Do they suspect in what wretched circumstances I am? Would
it surprise them to know all that depends upon that budget of paltry
scribbling? I suppose not; it must be a daily experience with them.
Well, I must write a begging letter.'

It was raining and windy. He went slowly homewards, and was on the point
of entering the public door of the flats when his uneasiness became so
great that he turned and walked past. If he went in, he must at
once write his appeal for money, and he felt that he could not. The
degradation seemed too great.

Was there no way of getting over the next few weeks? Rent, of course,
would be due at Christmas, but that payment might be postponed; it was
only a question of buying food and fuel. Amy had offered to ask her
mother for a few pounds; it would be cowardly to put this task upon her
now that he had promised to meet the difficulty himself. What man in
all London could and would lend him money? He reviewed the list of his
acquaintances, but there was only one to whom he could appeal with the
slightest hope--that was Carter.

Half an hour later he entered that same hospital door through which,
some years ago, he had passed as a half-starved applicant for work. The
matron met him.

'Is Mr Carter here?'

'No, sir. But we expect him any minute. Will you wait?'

He entered the familiar office, and sat down. At the table where he had
been wont to work, a young clerk was writing. If only all the events of
the last few years could be undone, and he, with no soul dependent upon
him, be once more earning his pound a week in this room! What a happy
man he was in those days!

Nearly half an hour passed. It is the common experience of beggars
to have to wait. Then Carter came in with quick step; he wore a heavy
ulster of the latest fashion, new gloves, a resplendent silk hat; his
cheeks were rosy from the east wind.

'Ha, Reardon! How do? how do? Delighted to see you!'

'Are you very busy?'

'Well, no, not particularly. A few cheques to sign, and we're just
getting out our Christmas appeals. You remember?'

He laughed gaily. There was a remarkable freedom from snobbishness in
this young man; the fact of Reardon's intellectual superiority had long
ago counteracted Carter's social prejudices.

'I should like to have a word with you.'

'Right you are!'

They went into a small inner room. Reardon's pulse beat at fever-rate;
his tongue was cleaving to his palate.

'What is it, old man?' asked the secretary, seating himself and flinging
one of his legs over the other. 'You look rather seedy, do you know. Why
the deuce don't you and your wife look us up now and then?'

'I've had a hard pull to finish my novel.'

'Finished, is it? I'm glad to hear that. When'll it be out? I'll send
scores of people to Mudie's after it.

'Thanks; but I don't think much of it, to tell you the truth.'

'Oh, we know what that means.'

Reardon was talking like an automaton. It seemed to him that he turned
screws and pressed levers for the utterance of his next words.

'I may as well say at once what I have come for. Could you lend me ten
pounds for a month--in fact, until I get the money for my book?'

The secretary's countenance fell, though not to that expression of utter
coldness which would have come naturally under the circumstances to a
great many vivacious men. He seemed genuinely embarrassed.

'By Jove! I--confound it! To tell you the truth, I haven't ten pounds
to lend. Upon my word, I haven't, Reardon! These infernal housekeeping
expenses! I don't mind telling you, old man, that Edith and I have been
pushing the pace rather.' He laughed, and thrust his hands down into
his trousers-pockets. 'We pay such a darned rent, you know--hundred and
twenty-five. We've only just been saying we should have to draw it mild
for the rest of the winter. But I'm infernally sorry; upon my word I
am.'

'And I am sorry to have annoyed you by the unseasonable request.'

'Devilish seasonable, Reardon, I assure you!' cried the secretary, and
roared at his joke. It put him into a better temper than ever, and he
said at length: 'I suppose a fiver wouldn't be much use?--For a month,
you say?--I might manage a fiver, I think.'

'It would be very useful. But on no account if----'

'No, no; I could manage a fiver, for a month. Shall I give you a
cheque?'

'I'm ashamed----'

'Not a bit of it! I'll go and write the cheque.'

Reardon's face was burning. Of the conversation that followed when
Carter again presented himself he never recalled a word. The bit of
paper was crushed together in his hand. Out in the street again, he all
but threw it away, dreaming for the moment that it was a 'bus ticket or
a patent medicine bill.

He reached home much after the dinner-hour. Amy was surprised at his
long absence.

'Got anything?' she asked.

'Yes.'

It was half his intention to deceive her, to say that the publishers had
advanced him five pounds. But that would be his first word of untruth
to Amy, and why should he be guilty of it? He told her all that had
happened. The result of this frankness was something that he had not
anticipated; Amy exhibited profound vexation.

'Oh, you SHOULDN'T have done that!' she exclaimed. 'Why didn't you come
home and tell me? I would have gone to mother at once.'

'But does it matter?'

'Of course it does,' she replied sharply. 'Mr Carter will tell his wife,
and how pleasant that is?'

'I never thought of that. And perhaps it wouldn't have seemed to me so
annoying as it does to you.'

'Very likely not.'

She turned abruptly away, and stood at a distance in gloomy muteness.

'Well,' she said at length, 'there's no helping it now. Come and have
your dinner.'

'You have taken away my appetite.'

'Nonsense! I suppose you're dying of hunger.'

They had a very uncomfortable meal, exchanging few words. On Amy's face
was a look more resembling bad temper than anything Reardon had ever
seen there. After dinner he went and sat alone in the study. Amy did
not come near him. He grew stubbornly angry; remembering the pain he had
gone through, he felt that Amy's behaviour to him was cruel. She must
come and speak when she would.

At six o'clock she showed her face in the doorway and asked if he would
come to tea.

'Thank you,' he replied, 'I had rather stay here.'

'As you please.'

And he sat alone until about nine. It was only then he recollected that
he must send a note to the publishers, calling their attention to the
parcel he had left. He wrote it, and closed with a request that they
would let him hear as soon as they conveniently could. As he was
putting on his hat and coat to go out and post the letter Amy opened the
dining-room door.

'You're going out?'

'Yes.'

'Shall you be long?'

'I think not.'

He was away only a few minutes. On returning he went first of all into
the study, but the thought of Amy alone in the other room would not let
him rest. He looked in and saw that she was sitting without a fire.

'You can't stay here in the cold, Amy.'

'I'm afraid I must get used to it,' she replied, affecting to be closely
engaged upon some sewing.

That strength of character which it had always delighted him to read in
her features was become an ominous hardness. He felt his heart sink as
he looked at her.

'Is poverty going to have the usual result in our case?' he asked,
drawing nearer.

'I never pretended that I could be indifferent to it.'

'Still, don't you care to try and resist it?'

She gave no answer. As usual in conversation with an aggrieved woman it
was necessary to go back from the general to the particular.

'I'm afraid,' he said, 'that the Carters already knew pretty well how
things were going with us.'

'That's a very different thing. But when it comes to asking them for
money--'

'I'm very sorry. I would rather have done anything if I had known how it
would annoy you.'

'If we have to wait a month, five pounds will be very little use to us.'

She detailed all manner of expenses that had to be met--outlay there was
no possibility of avoiding so long as their life was maintained on its
present basis.

'However, you needn't trouble any more about it. I'll see to it. Now you
are free from your book try to rest.'

'Come and sit by the fire. There's small chance of rest for me if we are
thinking unkindly of each other.'

A doleful Christmas. Week after week went by and Reardon knew that Amy
must have exhausted the money he had given her. But she made no more
demands upon him, and necessaries were paid for in the usual way. He
suffered from a sense of humiliation; sometimes he found it difficult to
look in his wife's face.

When the publishers' letter came it contained an offer of seventy-five
pounds for the copyright of 'Margaret Home,' twenty-five more to be
paid if the sale in three-volume form should reach a certain number of
copies.

Here was failure put into unmistakable figures. Reardon said to himself
that it was all over with his profession of authorship. The book could
not possibly succeed even to the point of completing his hundred pounds;
it would meet with universal contempt, and indeed deserved nothing
better.

'Shall you accept this?' asked Amy, after dreary silence.

'No one else would offer terms as good.'

'Will they pay you at once?'

'I must ask them to.'

Well, it was seventy-five pounds in hand. The cheque came as soon as
it was requested, and Reardon's face brightened for the moment. Blessed
money! root of all good, until the world invent some saner economy.

'How much do you owe your mother?' he inquired, without looking at Amy.

'Six pounds,' she answered coldly.

'And five to Carter; and rent, twelve pounds ten. We shall have a matter
of fifty pounds to go on with.'



CHAPTER XII. WORK WITHOUT HOPE

The prudent course was so obvious that he marvelled at Amy's failing
to suggest it. For people in their circumstances to be paying a rent
of fifty pounds when a home could be found for half the money was
recklessness; there would be no difficulty in letting the flat for this
last year of their lease, and the cost of removal would be trifling. The
mental relief of such a change might enable him to front with courage
a problem in any case very difficult, and, as things were, desperate.
Three months ago, in a moment of profoundest misery, he had proposed
this step; courage failed him to speak of it again, Amy's look and voice
were too vivid in his memory. Was she not capable of such a sacrifice
for his sake? Did she prefer to let him bear all the responsibility of
whatever might result from a futile struggle to keep up appearances?

Between him and her there was no longer perfect confidence. Her silence
meant reproach, and--whatever might have been the case before--there was
no doubt that she now discussed him with her mother, possibly with other
people. It was not likely that she concealed his own opinion of the book
he had just finished; all their acquaintances would be prepared to greet
its publication with private scoffing or with mournful shaking of the
head. His feeling towards Amy entered upon a new phase. The stability of
his love was a source of pain; condemning himself, he felt at the same
time that he was wronged. A coldness which was far from representing
the truth began to affect his manner and speech, and Amy did not seem
to notice it, at all events she made no kind of protest. They no longer
talked of the old subjects, but of those mean concerns of material life
which formerly they had agreed to dismiss as quickly as possible. Their
relations to each other--not long ago an inexhaustible topic--would not
bear spoken comment; both were too conscious of the danger-signal when
they looked that way.

In the time of waiting for the publishers' offer, and now again when he
was asking himself how he should use the respite granted him, Reardon
spent his days at the British Museum. He could not read to much purpose,
but it was better to sit here among strangers than seem to be idling
under Amy's glance. Sick of imaginative writing, he turned to the
studies which had always been most congenial, and tried to shape out a
paper or two like those he had formerly disposed of to editors. Among
his unused material lay a mass of notes he had made in a reading of
Diogenes Laertius, and it seemed to him now that he might make something
salable out of these anecdotes of the philosophers. In a happier mood he
could have written delightfully on such a subject--not learnedly, but in
the strain of a modern man whose humour and sensibility find free play
among the classic ghosts; even now he was able to recover something of
the light touch which had given value to his published essays.

Meanwhile the first number of The Current had appeared, and Jasper
Milvain had made a palpable hit. Amy spoke very often of the article
called 'Typical Readers,' and her interest in its author was freely
manifested. Whenever a mention of Jasper came under her notice she read
it out to her husband. Reardon smiled and appeared glad, but he did not
care to discuss Milvain with the same frankness as formerly.

One evening at the end of January he told Amy what he had been writing
at the Museum, and asked her if she would care to hear it read.

'I began to wonder what you were doing,' she replied.

'Then why didn't you ask me?'

'I was rather afraid to.'

'Why afraid?'

'It would have seemed like reminding you that--you know what I mean.'

'That a month or two more will see us at the same crisis again. Still, I
had rather you had shown an interest in my doings.'

After a pause Amy asked:

'Do you think you can get a paper of this kind accepted?'

'It isn't impossible. I think it's rather well done. Let me read you a
page--'

'Where will you send it?' she interrupted.

'To The Wayside.'

'Why not try The Current? Ask Milvain to introduce you to Mr Fadge. They
pay much better, you know.'

'But this isn't so well suited for Fadge. And I much prefer to be
independent, as long as it's possible.'

'That's one of your faults, Edwin,' remarked his wife, mildly. 'It's
only the strongest men that can make their way independently. You ought
to use every means that offers.'

'Seeing that I am so weak?'

'I didn't think it would offend you. I only meant---'

'No, no; you are quite right. Certainly, I am one of the men who need
all the help they can get. But I assure you, this thing won't do for The
Current.'

'What a pity you will go hack to those musty old times! Now think of
that article of Milvain's. If only you could do something of that kind!
What do people care about Diogenes and his tub and his lantern?'

'My dear girl, Diogenes Laertius had neither tub nor lantern, that I
know of. You are making a mistake; but it doesn't matter.'

'No, I don't think it does.' The caustic note was not very pleasant on
Amy's lips. 'Whoever he was, the mass of readers will be frightened by
his name.'

'Well, we have to recognise that the mass of readers will never care for
anything I do.'

'You will never convince me that you couldn't write in a popular way if
you tried. I'm sure you are quite as clever as Milvain--'

Reardon made an impatient gesture.

'Do leave Milvain aside for a little! He and I are as unlike as two
men could be. What's the use of constantly comparing us?'

Amy looked at him. He had never spoken to her so brusquely.

'How can you say that I am constantly comparing you?'

'If not in spoken words, then in your thoughts.'

'That's not a very nice thing to say, Edwin.'

'You make it so unmistakable, Amy. What I mean is, that you are always
regretting the difference between him and me. You lament that I can't
write in that attractive way. Well, I lament it myself--for your sake. I
wish I had Milvain's peculiar talent, so that I could get reputation and
money. But I haven't, and there's an end of it. It irritates a man to be
perpetually told of his disadvantages.'

'I will never mention Milvain's name again,' said Amy coldly.

'Now that's ridiculous, and you know it.'

'I feel the same about your irritation. I can't see that I have given
any cause for it.'

'Then we'll talk no more of the matter.'

Reardon threw his manuscript aside and opened a book. Amy never asked
him to resume his intention of reading what he had written.

However, the paper was accepted. It came out in The Wayside for March,
and Reardon received seven pounds ten for it. By that time he had
written another thing of the same gossipy kind, suggested by Pliny's
Letters. The pleasant occupation did him good, but there was no
possibility of pursuing this course. 'Margaret Home' would be published
in April; he might get the five-and-twenty pounds contingent upon a
certain sale, yet that could in no case be paid until the middle of the
year, and long before then he would be penniless. His respite drew to an
end.

But now he took counsel of no one; as far as it was possible he lived in
solitude, never seeing those of his acquaintances who were outside the
literary world, and seldom even his colleagues. Milvain was so busy that
he had only been able to look in twice or thrice since Christmas, and
Reardon nowadays never went to Jasper's lodgings.

He had the conviction that all was over with the happiness of his
married life, though how the events which were to express this ruin
would shape themselves he could not foresee. Amy was revealing that
aspect of her character to which he had been blind, though a practical
man would have perceived it from the first; so far from helping him to
support poverty, she perhaps would even refuse to share it with him.
He knew that she was slowly drawing apart; already there was a divorce
between their minds, and he tortured himself in uncertainty as to how
far he retained her affections. A word of tenderness, a caress, no
longer met with response from her; her softest mood was that of mere
comradeship. All the warmth of her nature was expended upon the child;
Reardon learnt how easy it is for a mother to forget that both parents
have a share in her offspring.

He was beginning to dislike the child. But for Willie's existence Amy
would still love him with undivided heart; not, perhaps, so passionately
as once, but still with lover's love. And Amy understood--or, at all
events, remarked--this change in him. She was aware that he seldom asked
a question about Willie, and that he listened with indifference when she
spoke of the little fellow's progress. In part offended, she was also in
part pleased.

But for the child, mere poverty, he said to himself, should never have
sundered them. In the strength of his passion he could have overcome all
her disappointments; and, indeed, but for that new care, he would
most likely never have fallen to this extremity of helplessness. It is
natural in a weak and sensitive man to dream of possibilities disturbed
by the force of circumstance. For one hour which he gave to conflict
with his present difficulties, Reardon spent many in contemplation of
the happiness that might have been.

Even yet, it needed but a little money to redeem all. Amy had no
extravagant aspirations; a home of simple refinement and freedom from
anxiety would restore her to her nobler self. How could he find fault
with her? She knew nothing of such sordid life as he had gone through,
and to lack money for necessities seemed to her degrading beyond
endurance. Why, even the ordinary artisan's wife does not suffer such
privations as hers at the end of the past year. For lack of that little
money his life must be ruined. Of late he had often thought about the
rich uncle, John Yule, who might perhaps leave something to Amy; but the
hope was so uncertain. And supposing such a thing were to happen; would
it be perfectly easy to live upon his wife's bounty--perhaps exhausting
a small capital, so that, some years hence, their position would be
no better than before? Not long ago, he could have taken anything from
Amy's hand; would it be so simple since the change that had come between
them?

Having written his second magazine-article (it was rejected by two
editors, and he had no choice but to hold it over until sufficient time
had elapsed to allow of his again trying The Wayside), he saw that he
must perforce plan another novel. But this time he was resolute not to
undertake three volumes. The advertisements informed him that numbers of
authors were abandoning that procrustean system; hopeless as he was, he
might as well try his chance with a book which could be written in a
few weeks. And why not a glaringly artificial story with a sensational
title? It could not be worse than what he had last written.

So, without a word to Amy, he put aside his purely intellectual work
and began once more the search for a 'plot.' This was towards the end of
February. The proofs of 'Margaret Home' were coming in day by day; Amy
had offered to correct them, but after all he preferred to keep his
shame to himself as long as possible, and with a hurried reading he
dismissed sheet after sheet. His imagination did not work the more
happily for this repugnant task; still, he hit at length upon a
conception which seemed absurd enough for the purpose before him.
Whether he could persevere with it even to the extent of one volume was
very doubtful. But it should not be said of him that he abandoned his
wife and child to penury without one effort of the kind that Milvain and
Amy herself had recommended.

Writing a page or two of manuscript daily, and with several holocausts
to retard him, he had done nearly a quarter of the story when there came
a note from Jasper telling of Mrs Milvain's death. He handed it across
the breakfast-table to Amy, and watched her as she read it.

'I suppose it doesn't alter his position,' Amy remarked, without much
interest.

'I suppose not appreciably. He told me once his mother had a sufficient
income; but whatever she leaves will go to his sisters, I should think.
He has never said much to me.'

Nearly three weeks passed before they heard anything more from Jasper
himself; then he wrote, again from the country, saying that he purposed
bringing his sisters to live in London. Another week, and one evening he
appeared at the door.

A want of heartiness in Reardon's reception of him might have been
explained as gravity natural under the circumstances. But Jasper had
before this become conscious that he was not welcomed here quite so
cheerily as in the old days. He remarked it distinctly on that evening
when he accompanied Amy home from Mrs Yule's; since then he had allowed
his pressing occupations to be an excuse for the paucity of his visits.
It seemed to him perfectly intelligible that Reardon, sinking into
literary insignificance, should grow cool to a man entering upon a
successful career; the vein of cynicism in Jasper enabled him to pardon
a weakness of this kind, which in some measure flattered him. But he
both liked and respected Reardon, and at present he was in the mood to
give expression to his warmer feelings.

'Your book is announced, I see,' he said with an accent of pleasure, as
soon as he had seated himself.

'I didn't know it.'

'Yes. "New novel by the author of 'On Neutral Ground.'" Down for the
sixteenth of April. And I have a proposal to make about it. Will you
let me ask Fadge to have it noticed in "Books of the Month," in the May
Current?'

'I strongly advise you to let it take its chance. The book isn't worth
special notice, and whoever undertook to review it for Fadge would
either have to lie, or stultify the magazine.'

Jasper turned to Amy.

'Now what is to be done with a man like this? What is one to say to him,
Mrs Reardon?'

'Edwin dislikes the book,' Amy replied, carelessly.

'That has nothing to do with the matter. We know quite well that in
anything he writes there'll be something for a well-disposed reviewer
to make a good deal of. If Fadge will let me, I should do the thing
myself.'

Neither Reardon nor his wife spoke.

'Of course,' went on Milvain, looking at the former, 'if you had rather
I left it alone--'

'I had much rather. Please don't say anything about it.'

There was an awkward silence. Amy broke it by saying:

'Are your sisters in town, Mr Milvain?'

'Yes. We came up two days ago. I found lodgings for them not far from
Mornington Road. Poor girls! they don't quite know where they are, yet.
Of course they will keep very quiet for a time, then I must try to get
friends for them. Well, they have one already--your cousin, Miss Yule.
She has already been to see them.'

'I'm very glad of that.'

Amy took an opportunity of studying his face. There was again a
silence as if of constraint. Reardon, glancing at his wife, said with
hesitation:

'When they care to see other visitors, I'm sure Amy would be very
glad--'

'Certainly!' his wife added.

'Thank you very much. Of course I knew I could depend on Mrs Reardon to
show them kindness in that way. But let me speak frankly of something.
My sisters have made quite a friend of Miss Yule, since she was down
there last year. Wouldn't that'--he turned to Amy--'cause you a little
awkwardness?'

Amy had a difficulty in replying. She kept her eyes on the ground.

'You have had no quarrel with your cousin,' remarked Reardon.

'None whatever. It's only my mother and my uncle.'

'I can't imagine Miss Yule having a quarrel with anyone,' said Jasper.
Then he added quickly: 'Well, things must shape themselves naturally. We
shall see. For the present they will be fully occupied. Of course it's
best that they should be. I shall see them every day, and Miss Yule will
come pretty often, I dare say.'

Reardon caught Amy's eye, but at once looked away again.

'My word!' exclaimed Milvain, after a moment's meditation. 'It's well
this didn't happen a year ago. The girls have no income; only a little
cash to go on with. We shall have our work set. It's a precious lucky
thing that I have just got a sort of footing.'

Reardon muttered an assent.

'And what are you doing now?' Jasper inquired suddenly.

'Writing a one-volume story.'

'I'm glad to hear that. Any special plan for its publication?'

'No.'

'Then why not offer it to Jedwood? He's publishing a series of
one-volume novels. You know of Jedwood, don't you? He was Culpepper's
manager; started business about half a year ago, and it looks as if he
would do well. He married that woman--what's her name?--Who wrote "Mr
Henderson's Wives"?'

'Never heard of it.'

'Nonsense!--Miss Wilkes, of course. Well, she married this fellow
Jedwood, and there was a great row about something or other between
him and her publishers. Mrs Boston Wright told me all about it. An
astonishing woman that; a cyclopaedia of the day's small talk. I'm quite
a favourite with her; she's promised to help the girls all she can.
Well, but I was talking about Jedwood. Why not offer him this book of
yours? He's eager to get hold of the new writers. Advertises hugely; he
has the whole back page of The Study about every other week. I suppose
Miss Wilkes's profits are paying for it. He has just given Markland two
hundred pounds for a paltry little tale that would scarcely swell out
to a volume. Markland told me himself. You know that I've scraped an
acquaintance with him? Oh! I suppose I haven't seen you since then. He's
a dwarfish fellow with only one eye. Mrs Boston Wright cries him up at
every opportunity.'

'Who IS Mrs Boston Wright?' asked Reardon, laughing impatiently.

'Edits The English Girl, you know. She's had an extraordinary life.
Was born in Mauritius--no, Ceylon--I forget; some such place. Married a
