sailor at fifteen. Was shipwrecked somewhere, and only restored to life
after terrific efforts;--her story leaves it all rather vague. Then she
turns up as a newspaper correspondent at the Cape. Gave up that, and
took to some kind of farming, I forget where. Married again (first
husband lost in aforementioned shipwreck), this time a Baptist minister,
and began to devote herself to soup-kitchens in Liverpool. Husband
burned to death, somewhere. She's next discovered in the thick of
literary society in London. A wonderful woman, I assure you. Must be
nearly fifty, but she looks twenty-five.'

He paused, then added impulsively:

'Let me take you to one of her evenings--nine on Thursday. Do persuade
him, Mrs Reardon?'

Reardon shook his head.

'No, no. I should be horribly out of my element.'

'I can't see why. You would meet all sorts of well-known people; those
you ought to have met long ago. Better still, let me ask her to send
an invitation for both of you. I'm sure you'd like her, Mrs Reardon.
There's a good deal of humbug about her, it's true, but some solid
qualities as well. No one has a word to say against her. And it's a
splendid advertisement to have her for a friend. She'll talk about your
books and articles till all is blue.'

Amy gave a questioning look at her husband. But Reardon moved in an
uncomfortable way.

'We'll see about it,' he said. 'Some day, perhaps.'

'Let me know whenever you feel disposed. But about Jedwood: I happen to
know a man who reads for him.'

'Heavens!' cried Reardon. 'Who don't you know?'

'The simplest thing in the world. At present it's a large part of my
business to make acquaintances. Why, look you; a man who has to live
by miscellaneous writing couldn't get on without a vast variety of
acquaintances. One's own brain would soon run dry; a clever fellow knows
how to use the brains of other people.'

Amy listened with an unconscious smile which expressed keen interest.

'Oh,' pursued Jasper, 'when did you see Whelpdale last?'

'Haven't seen him for a long time.'

'You don't know what he's doing? The fellow has set up as a "literary
adviser." He has an advertisement in The Study every week. "To Young
Authors and Literary Aspirants"--something of the kind. "Advice given on
choice of subjects, MSS. read, corrected, and recommended to publishers.
Moderate terms." A fact! And what's more, he made six guineas in the
first fortnight; so he says, at all events. Now that's one of the finest
jokes I ever heard. A man who can't get anyone to publish his own books
makes a living by telling other people how to write!'

'But it's a confounded swindle!'

'Oh, I don't know. He's capable of correcting the grammar of "literary
aspirants," and as for recommending to publishers--well, anyone can
recommend, I suppose.'

Reardon's indignation yielded to laughter.

'It's not impossible that he may thrive by this kind of thing.'

'Not at all,' assented Jasper.

Shortly after this he looked at his watch.

'I must be off, my friends. I have something to write before I can go to
my truckle-bed, and it'll take me three hours at least.
Good-bye, old man. Let me know when your story's finished, and we'll
talk about it. And think about Mrs Boston Wright; oh, and about that
review in The Current. I wish you'd let me do it. Talk it over with your
guide, philosopher, and friend.'

He indicated Amy, who laughed in a forced way.

When he was gone, the two sat without speaking for several minutes.

'Do you care to make friends with those girls?' asked Reardon at length.

'I suppose in decency I must call upon them?'

'I suppose so.'

'You may find them very agreeable.'

'Oh yes.'

They conversed with their own thoughts for a while. Then Reardon burst
out laughing.

'Well, there's the successful man, you see. Some day he'll live in a
mansion, and dictate literary opinions to the universe.'

'How has he offended you?'

'Offended me? Not at all. I am glad of his cheerful prospects.'

'Why should you refuse to go among those people? It might be good for
you in several ways.'

'If the chance had come when I was publishing my best work, I dare say I
shouldn't have refused. But I certainly shall not present myself as the
author of "Margaret Home," and the rubbish I'm now writing.'

'Then you must cease to write rubbish.'

'Yes. I must cease to write altogether.'

'And do what?'

'I wish to Heaven I knew!'



CHAPTER XIII. A WARNING

In the spring list of Mr Jedwood's publications, announcement was
made of a new work by Alfred Yule. It was called 'English Prose in the
Nineteenth Century,' and consisted of a number of essays (several of
which had already seen the light in periodicals) strung into continuity.
The final chapter dealt with contemporary writers, more especially those
who served to illustrate the author's theme--that journalism is the
destruction of prose style: on certain popular writers of the day there
was an outpouring of gall which was not likely to be received as though
it were sweet ointment. The book met with rather severe treatment in
critical columns; it could scarcely be ignored (the safest mode of
attack when one's author has no expectant public), and only the most
skilful could write of it in a hostile spirit without betraying that
some of its strokes had told. An evening newspaper which piqued itself
on independence indulged in laughing appreciation of the polemical
chapter, and the next day printed a scornful letter from a
thinly-disguised correspondent who assailed both book and reviewer. For
the moment people talked more of Alfred Yule than they had done since
his memorable conflict with Clement Fadge.

The publisher had hoped for this. Mr Jedwood was an energetic and
sanguine man, who had entered upon his business with a determination to
rival in a year or so the houses which had slowly risen into commanding
stability. He had no great capital, but the stroke of fortune which had
wedded him to a popular novelist enabled him to count on steady profit
from one source, and boundless faith in his own judgment urged him to an
initial outlay which made the prudent shake their heads. He talked much
of 'the new era,' foresaw revolutions in publishing and book-selling,
planned every week a score of untried ventures which should appeal to
the democratic generation just maturing; in the meantime, was ready to
publish anything which seemed likely to get talked about.

The May number of The Current, in its article headed 'Books of the
Month,' devoted about half a page to 'English Prose in the Nineteenth
Century.' This notice was a consummate example of the flippant style of
attack. Flippancy, the most hopeless form of intellectual vice, was a
characterising note of Mr Fadge's periodical; his monthly comments on
publications were already looked for with eagerness by that growing
class of readers who care for nothing but what can be made matter of
ridicule. The hostility of other reviewers was awkward and ineffectual
compared with this venomous banter, which entertained by showing that in
the book under notice there was neither entertainment nor any other kind
of interest. To assail an author without increasing the number of his
readers is the perfection of journalistic skill, and The Current, had
it stood alone, would fully have achieved this end. As it was, silence
might have been better tactics. But Mr Fadge knew that his enemy would
smart under the poisoned pin-points, and that was something gained.

On the day that The Current appeared, its treatment of Alfred Yule was
discussed in Mr Jedwood's private office. Mr Quarmby, who had intimate
relations with the publisher, happened to look in just as a young man
(one of Mr Jedwood's 'readers') was expressing a doubt whether Fadge
himself was the author of the review.

'But there's Fadge's thumb-mark all down the page,' cried Mr Quarmby.

'He inspired the thing, of course; but I rather think it was written by
that fellow Milvain.'

'Think so?' asked the publisher.

'Well, I know with certainty that the notice of Markland's novel is his
writing, and I have reasons for suspecting that he did Yule's book as
well.'

'Smart youngster, that,' remarked Mr Jedwood. 'Who is he, by-the-bye?'

'Somebody's illegitimate son, I believe,' replied the source of
trustworthy information, with a laugh. 'Denham says he met him in New
York a year or two ago, under another name.

'Excuse me,' interposed Mr Quarmby, 'there's some mistake in all that.'

He went on to state what he knew, from Yule himself, concerning
Milvain's history. Though in this instance a corrector, Mr Quarmby took
an opportunity, a few hours later, of informing Mr Hinks that the attack
on Yule in The Current was almost certainly written by young Milvain,
with the result that when the rumour reached Yule's ears it was
delivered as an undoubted and well-known fact.

It was a month prior to this that Milvain made his call upon Marian
Yule, on the Sunday when her father was absent. When told of the visit,
Yule assumed a manner of indifference, but his daughter understood that
he was annoyed. With regard to the sisters who would shortly be living
in London, he merely said that Marian must behave as discretion directed
her. If she wished to invite the Miss Milvains to St Paul's Crescent,
he only begged that the times and seasons of the household might not be
disturbed.

As her habit was, Marian took refuge in silence. Nothing could have been
more welcome to her than the proximity of Maud and Dora, but she foresaw
that her own home would not be freely open to them; perhaps it might be
necessary to behave with simple frankness, and let her friends know the
embarrassments of the situation. But that could not be done in the first
instance; the unkindness would seem too great. A day after the arrival
of the girls, she received a note from Dora, and almost at once replied
to it by calling at her friends' lodgings. A week after that, Maud and
Dora came to St Paul's Crescent; it was Sunday, and Mr Yule purposely
kept away from home. They had only been once to the house since then,
again without meeting Mr Yule. Marian, however, visited them at their
lodgings frequently; now and then she met Jasper there. The latter never
spoke of her father, and there was no question of inviting him to repeat
his call.

In the end, Marian was obliged to speak on the subject with her mother.
Mrs Yule offered an occasion by asking when the Miss Milvains were
coming again.

'I don't think I shall ever ask them again,' Marian replied.

Her mother understood, and looked troubled.

'I must tell them how it is, that's all,' the girl went on. 'They are
sensible; they won't be offended with me.'

'But your father has never had anything to say against them,' urged Mrs
Yule. 'Not a word to me, Marian. I'd tell you the truth if he had.'

'It's too disagreeable, all the same. I can't invite them here with
pleasure. Father has grown prejudiced against them all, and he won't
change. No, I shall just tell them.'

'It's very hard for you,' sighed her mother. 'If I thought I could do
any good by speaking--but I can't, my dear.'

'I know it, mother. Let us go on as we did before.'

The day after this, when Yule came home about the hour of dinner, he
called Marian's name from within the study. Marian had not left the
house to-day; her work had been set, in the shape of a long task
of copying from disorderly manuscript. She left the sitting-room in
obedience to her father's summons.

'Here's something that will afford you amusement,' he said, holding
to her the new number of The Current, and indicating the notice of his
book.

She read a few lines, then threw the thing on to the table.

'That kind of writing sickens me,' she exclaimed, with anger in her
eyes. 'Only base and heartless people can write in that way. You surely
won't let it trouble you?'

'Oh, not for a moment,' her father answered, with exaggerated show of
calm. 'But I am surprised that you don't see the literary merit of the
work. I thought it would distinctly appeal to you.'

There was a strangeness in his voice, as well as in the words, which
caused her to look at him inquiringly. She knew him well enough to
understand that such a notice would irritate him profoundly; but why
should he go out of his way to show it her, and with this peculiar
acerbity of manner?

'Why do you say that, father?'

'It doesn't occur to you who may probably have written it?'

She could not miss his meaning; astonishment held her mute for a moment,
then she said:

'Surely Mr Fadge wrote it himself?'

'I am told not. I am informed on very good authority that one of his
young gentlemen has the credit of it.'

'You refer, of course, to Mr Milvain,' she replied quietly. 'But I think
that can't be true.'

He looked keenly at her. He had expected a more decided protest.

'I see no reason for disbelieving it.'

'I see every reason, until I have your evidence.'

This was not at all Marian's natural tone in argument with him. She was
wont to be submissive.

'I was told,' he continued, hardening face and voice, 'by someone who
had it from Jedwood.'

Yule was conscious of untruth in this statement, but his mood would not
allow him to speak ingenuously, and he wished to note the effect upon
Marian of what he said. There were two beliefs in him: on the one hand,
he recognised Fadge in every line of the writing; on the other, he had a
perverse satisfaction in convincing himself that it was Milvain who had
caught so successfully the master's manner. He was not the kind of man
who can resist an opportunity of justifying, to himself and others, a
course into which he has been led by mingled feelings, all more or less
unjustifiable.

'How should Jedwood know?' asked Marian.

Yule shrugged his shoulders.

'As if these things didn't get about among editors and publishers!'

'In this case, there's a mistake.'

'And why, pray?' His voice trembled with choler. 'Why need there be a
mistake?'

'Because Mr Milvain is quite incapable of reviewing your book in such a
spirit.'

'There is your mistake, my girl. Milvain will do anything that's asked
of him, provided he's well enough paid.'

Marian reflected. When she raised her eyes again they were perfectly
calm.

'What has led you to think that?'

'Don't I know the type of man? Noscitur ex sociis--have you Latin enough
for that?'

'You'll find that you are misinformed,' Marian replied, and therewith
went from the room.

She could not trust herself to converse longer. A resentment such as her
father had never yet excited in her--such, indeed, as she had seldom, if
ever, conceived--threatened to force utterance for itself in words which
would change the current of her whole life. She saw her father in his
worst aspect, and her heart was shaken by an unnatural revolt from him.
Let his assurance of what he reported be ever so firm, what right had
he to make this use of it? His behaviour was spiteful. Suppose he
entertained suspicions which seemed to make it his duty to warn her
against Milvain, this was not the way to go about it. A father actuated
by simple motives of affection would never speak and look thus.

It was the hateful spirit of literary rancour that ruled him; the spirit
that made people eager to believe all evil, that blinded and maddened.
Never had she felt so strongly the unworthiness of the existence to
which she was condemned. That contemptible review, and now her father's
ignoble passion--such things were enough to make all literature appear a
morbid excrescence upon human life.

Forgetful of the time, she sat in her bedroom until a knock at the
door, and her mother's voice, admonished her that dinner was waiting. An
impulse all but caused her to say that she would rather not go down
for the meal, that she wished to be left alone. But this would be weak
peevishness. She just looked at the glass to see that her face bore no
unwonted signs, and descended to take her place as usual.

Throughout the dinner there passed no word of conversation. Yule was at
his blackest; he gobbled a few mouthfuls, then occupied himself with the
evening paper. On rising, he said to Marian:

'Have you copied the whole of that?'

The tone would have been uncivil if addressed to an impertinent servant.

'Not much more than half,' was the cold reply.

'Can you finish it to-night?'

'I'm afraid not. I am going out.'

'Then I must do it myself'

And he went to the study.

Mrs Yule was in an anguish of nervousness.

'What is it, dear?' she asked of Marian, in a pleading whisper. 'Oh,
don't quarrel with your father! Don't!'

'I can't be a slave, mother, and I can't be treated unjustly.'

'What is it? Let me go and speak to him.'

'It's no use. We CAN'T live in terror.'

For Mrs Yule this was unimaginable disaster. She had never dreamt that
Marian, the still, gentle Marian, could be driven to revolt. And it had
come with the suddenness of a thunderclap. She wished to ask what had
taken place between father and daughter in the brief interview before
dinner; but Marian gave her no chance, quitting the room upon those last
trembling words.

The girl had resolved to visit her friends, the sisters, and tell them
that in future they must never come to see her at home. But it was no
easy thing for her to stifle her conscience, and leave her father to
toil over that copying which had need of being finished. Not her will,
but her exasperated feeling, had replied to him that she would not do
the work; already it astonished her that she had really spoken such
words. And as the throbbing of her pulses subsided, she saw more clearly
into the motives of this wretched tumult which possessed her. Her
mind was harassed with a fear lest in defending Milvain she had spoken
foolishly. Had he not himself said to her that he might be guilty of
base things, just to make his way? Perhaps it was the intolerable pain
of imagining that he had already made good his words, which robbed her
of self-control and made her meet her father's rudeness with defiance.

Impossible to carry out her purpose; she could not deliberately leave
the house and spend some hours away with the thought of such wrath and
misery left behind her. Gradually she was returning to her natural self;
fear and penitence were chill at her heart.

She went down to the study, tapped, and entered.

'Father, I said something that I did not really mean. Of course I shall
go on with the copying and finish it as soon as possible.'

'You will do nothing of the kind, my girl.' He was in his usual place,
already working at Marian's task; he spoke in a low, thick voice. 'Spend
your evening as you choose, I have no need of you.'

'I behaved very ill-temperedly. Forgive me, father.'

'Have the goodness to go away. You hear me?'

His eyes were inflamed, and his discoloured teeth showed themselves
savagely. Marian durst not, really durst not approach him. She
hesitated, but once more a sense of hateful injustice moved within her,
and she went away as quietly as she had entered.

She said to herself that now it was her perfect right to go whither
she would. But the freedom was only in theory; her submissive and timid
nature kept her at home--and upstairs in her own room; for, if she
went to sit with her mother, of necessity she must talk about what had
happened, and that she felt unable to do. Some friend to whom she could
unbosom all her sufferings would now have been very precious to her, but
Maud and Dora were her only intimates, and to them she might not make
the full confession which gives solace.

Mrs Yule did not venture to intrude upon her daughter's privacy. That
Marian neither went out nor showed herself in the house proved her
troubled state, but the mother had no confidence in her power to
comfort. At the usual time she presented herself in the study with her
husband's coffee; the face which was for an instant turned to her did
not invite conversation, but distress obliged her to speak.

'Why are you cross with Marian, Alfred?'

'You had better ask what she means by her extraordinary behaviour.'

A word of harsh rebuff was the most she had expected. Thus encouraged,
she timidly put another question.

'How has she behaved?'

'I suppose you have ears?'

'But wasn't there something before that? You spoke so angry to her.'

'Spoke so angry, did I? She is out, I suppose?'

'No, she hasn't gone out.'

'That'll do. Don't disturb me any longer.'

She did not venture to linger.

The breakfast next morning seemed likely to pass without any interchange
of words. But when Yule was pushing back his chair, Marian--who looked
pale and ill--addressed a question to him about the work she would
ordinarily have pursued to-day at the Reading-room. He answered in a
matter-of-fact tone, and for a few minutes they talked on the subject
much as at any other time. Half an hour after, Marian set forth for the
Museum in the usual way. Her father stayed at home.

It was the end of the episode for the present. Marian felt that the
best thing would be to ignore what had happened, as her father evidently
purposed doing. She had asked his forgiveness, and it was harsh in him
to have repelled her; but by now she was able once more to take into
consideration all his trials and toils, his embittered temper and the
new wound he had received. That he should resume his wonted manner was
sufficient evidence of regret on his part. Gladly she would have unsaid
her resentful words; she had been guilty of a childish outburst of
temper, and perhaps had prepared worse sufferings for the future.

And yet, perhaps it was as well that her father should be warned. She
was not all submission, he might try her beyond endurance; there might
come a day when perforce she must stand face to face with him, and make
it known she had her own claims upon life. It was as well he should hold
that possibility in view.

This evening no work was expected of her. Not long after dinner she
prepared for going out; to her mother she mentioned she should be back
about ten o'clock.

'Give my kind regards to them, dear--if you like to,' said Mrs Yule just
above her breath.

'Certainly I will.'



CHAPTER XIV. RECRUITS

Marian walked to the nearest point of Camden Road, and there waited for
an omnibus, which conveyed her to within easy reach of the street where
Maud and Dora Milvain had their lodgings. This was at the north-east of
Regent's Park, and no great distance from Mornington Road, where Jasper
still dwelt.

On learning that the young ladies were at home and alone, she ascended
to the second floor and knocked.

'That's right!' exclaimed Dora's pleasant voice, as the door opened and
the visitor showed herself. And then came the friendly greeting which
warmed Marian's heart, the greeting which until lately no house in
London could afford her.

The girls looked oddly out of place in this second-floor sitting-room,
with its vulgar furniture and paltry ornaments. Maud especially so, for
her fine figure was well displayed by the dress of mourning, and
her pale, handsome face had as little congruence as possible with a
background of humble circumstances.

Dora impressed one as a simpler nature, but she too had distinctly the
note of refinement which was out of harmony with these surroundings.
They occupied only two rooms, the sleeping-chamber being double-bedded;
they purchased food for themselves and prepared their own meals,
excepting dinner. During the first week a good many tears were shed
by both of them; it was not easy to transfer themselves from the
comfortable country home to this bare corner of lodgers' London. Maud,
as appeared at the first glance, was less disposed than her sister to
make the best of things; her countenance wore an expression rather of
discontent than of sorrow, and she did not talk with the same readiness
as Dora.

On the round table lay a number of books; when disturbed, the sisters
had been engaged in studious reading.

'I'm not sure that I do right in coming again so soon,' said Marian as
she took off her things. 'Your time is precious.'

'So are you,' replied Dora, laughing. 'It's only under protest that we
work in the evening when we have been hard at it all day.'

'We have news for you, too,' said Maud, who sat languidly on an uneasy
chair.

'Good, I hope?'

'Someone called to see us yesterday. I dare say you can guess who it
was.'

'Amy, perhaps?'

'Yes.'

'And how did you like her?'

The sisters seemed to have a difficulty in answering. Dora was the first
to speak.

'We thought she was sadly out of spirits. Indeed she told us that she
hasn't been very well lately. But I think we shall like her if we come
to know her better.'

'It was rather awkward, Marian,' the elder sister explained. 'We felt
obliged to say something about Mr Reardon's books, but we haven't read
any of them yet, you know, so I just said that I hoped soon to read his
new novel. "I suppose you have seen reviews of it?" she asked at once.
Of course I ought to have had the courage to say no, but I admitted
that I had seen one or two--Jasper showed us them. She looked very much
annoyed, and after that we didn't find much to talk about.'

'The reviews are very disagreeable,' said Marian with a troubled face.
'I have read the book since I saw you the other day, and I am afraid it
isn't good, but I have seen many worse novels more kindly reviewed.'

'Jasper says it's because Mr Reardon has no friends among the
journalists.'

'Still,' replied Marian, 'I'm afraid they couldn't have given the book
much praise, if they wrote honestly. Did Amy ask you to go and see her?'

'Yes, but she said it was uncertain how long they would be living at
their present address. And really, we can't feel sure whether we should
be welcome or not just now.'

Marian listened with bent head. She too had to make known to her friends
that they were not welcome in her own home; but she knew not how to
utter words which would sound so unkind.

'Your brother,' she said after a pause, 'will soon find suitable friends
for you.'

'Before long,' replied Dora, with a look of amusement, 'he's going to
take us to call on Mrs Boston Wright. I hardly thought he was serious at
first, but he says he really means it.'

Marian grew more and more silent. At home she had felt that it would not
be difficult to explain her troubles to these sympathetic girls, but now
the time had come for speaking, she was oppressed by shame and anxiety.
True, there was no absolute necessity for making the confession this
evening, and if she chose to resist her father's prejudice, things might
even go on in a seemingly natural way. But the loneliness of her life
had developed in her a sensitiveness which could not endure situations
such as the present; difficulties which are of small account to
people who take their part in active social life, harassed her to the
destruction of all peace. Dora was not long in noticing the dejected
mood which had come upon her friend.

'What's troubling you, Marian?'

'Something I can hardly bear to speak of. Perhaps it will be the end of
your friendship for me, and I should find it very hard to go back to my
old solitude.'

The girls gazed at her, in doubt at first whether she spoke seriously.

'What can you mean?' Dora exclaimed. 'What crime have you been
committing?'

Maud, who leaned with her elbows on the table, searched Marian's face
curiously, but said nothing.

'Has Mr Milvain shown you the new number of The Current?' Marian went on
to ask.

They replied with a negative, and Maud added:

'He has nothing in it this month, except a review.'

'A review?' repeated Marian in a low voice.

'Yes; of somebody's novel.'

'Markland's,' supplied Dora.

Marian drew a breath, but remained for a moment with her eyes cast down.

'Do go on, dear,' urged Dora. 'Whatever are you going to tell us?'

'There's a notice of father's book,' continued the other, 'a very
ill-natured one; it's written by the editor, Mr Fadge. Father and he
have been very unfriendly for a long time. Perhaps Mr Milvain has told
you something about it?'

Dora replied that he had.

'I don't know how it is in other professions,' Marian resumed, 'but I
hope there is less envy, hatred and malice than in this of ours. The
name of literature is often made hateful to me by the things I hear
and read. My father has never been very fortunate, and many things have
happened to make him bitter against the men who succeed; he has often
quarrelled with people who were at first his friends, but never so
seriously with anyone as with Mr Fadge. His feeling of enmity goes so
far that it includes even those who are in any way associated with Mr
Fadge. I am sorry to say'--she looked with painful anxiety from one to
the other of her hearers--'this has turned him against your brother,
and--'

Her voice was checked by agitation.

'We were afraid of this,' said Dora, in a tone of sympathy.

'Jasper feared it might be the case,' added Maud, more coldly, though
with friendliness.

'Why I speak of it at all,' Marian hastened to say, 'is because I am so
afraid it should make a difference between yourselves and me.'

'Oh! don't think that!' Dora exclaimed.

'I am so ashamed,' Marian went on in an uncertain tone, 'but I think
it will be better if I don't ask you to come and see me. It sounds
ridiculous; it is ridiculous and shameful. I couldn't complain if you
refused to have anything more to do with me.'

'Don't let it trouble you,' urged Maud, with perhaps a trifle more of
magnanimity in her voice than was needful. We quite understand. Indeed,
it shan't make any difference to us.'

But Marian had averted her face, and could not meet these assurances
with any show of pleasure. Now that the step was taken she felt that
her behaviour had been very weak. Unreasonable harshness such as her
father's ought to have been met more steadily; she had no right to make
it an excuse for such incivility to her friends. Yet only in some
such way as this could she make known to Jasper Milvain how her father
regarded him, which she felt it necessary to do. Now his sisters would
tell him, and henceforth there would be a clear understanding on both
sides. That state of things was painful to her, but it was better than
ambiguous relations.

'Jasper is very sorry about it,' said Dora, glancing rapidly at Marian.

'But his connection with Mr Fadge came about in such a natural way,'
added the eldest sister. 'And it was impossible for him to refuse
opportunities.'

'Impossible; I know,' Marian replied earnestly. 'Don't think that I
wish to justify my father. But I can understand him, and it must be very
difficult for you to do so. You can't know, as I do, how intensely he
has suffered in these wretched, ignoble quarrels. If only you will let
me come here still, in the same way, and still be as friendly to me. My
home has never been a place to which I could have invited friends
with any comfort, even if I had had any to invite. There were always
reasons--but I can't speak of them.'

'My dear Marian,' appealed Dora, 'don't distress yourself so! Do believe
that nothing whatever has happened to change our feeling to you. Has
there, Maud?'

'Nothing whatever. We are not unreasonable girls, Marian.'

'I am more grateful to you than I can say.'

It had seemed as if Marian must give way to the emotions which all but
choked her voice; she overcame them, however, and presently was able
to talk in pretty much her usual way, though when she smiled it was
but faintly. Maud tried to lead her thoughts in another direction by
speaking of work in which she and Dora were engaged. Already the sisters
were doing a new piece of compilation for Messrs Jolly and Monk; it was
more exacting than their initial task for the book market, and would
take a much longer time.

A couple of hours went by, and Marian had just spoken of taking her
leave, when a man's step was heard rapidly ascending the nearest flight
of stairs.

'Here's Jasper,' remarked Dora, and in a moment there sounded a short,
sharp summons at the door.

Jasper it was; he came in with radiant face, his eyes blinking before
the lamplight.

'Well, girls! Ha! how do you do, Miss Yule? I had just the vaguest sort
of expectation that you might be here. It seemed a likely night; I
don't know why. I say, Dora, we really must get two or three decent
easy-chairs for your room. I've seen some outside a second-hand
furniture shop in Hampstead Road, about six shillings apiece. There's no
sitting on chairs such as these.'

That on which he tried to dispose himself, when he had flung aside his
trappings, creaked and shivered ominously.

'You hear? I shall come plump on to the floor, if I don't mind. My word,
what a day I have had! I've just been trying what I really could do
in one day if I worked my hardest. Now just listen; it deserves to be
chronicled for the encouragement of aspiring youth. I got up at 7.30,
and whilst I breakfasted I read through a volume I had to review. By
10.30 the review was written--three-quarters of a column of the Evening
Budget.'

'Who is the unfortunate author?' interrupted Maud, caustically.

'Not unfortunate at all. I had to crack him up; otherwise I couldn't
have done the job so quickly. It's the easiest thing in the world to
write laudation; only an inexperienced grumbler would declare it was
easier to find fault. The book was Billington's "Vagaries"; pompous
idiocy, of course, but he lives in a big house and gives dinners. Well,
from 10.30 to 11, I smoked a cigar and reflected, feeling that the day
wasn't badly begun. At eleven I was ready to write my Saturday causerie
for the Will o' the Wisp; it took me till close upon one o'clock, which
was rather too long. I can't afford more than an hour and a half
for that job. At one, I rushed out to a dirty little eating-house
in Hampstead Road. Was back again by a quarter to two, having in the
meantime sketched a paper for The West End. Pipe in mouth, I sat down
to leisurely artistic work; by five, half the paper was done; the
other half remains for to-morrow. From five to half-past I read four
newspapers and two magazines, and from half-past to a quarter to six I
jotted down several ideas that had come to me whilst reading. At six I
was again in the dirty eating-house, satisfying a ferocious hunger. Home
once more at 6.45, and for two hours wrote steadily at a long affair I
have in hand for The Current. Then I came here, thinking hard all the
way. What say you to this? Have I earned a night's repose?'

'And what's the value of it all?' asked Maud.

'Probably from ten to twelve guineas, if I calculated.'

'I meant, what was the literary value of it?' said his sister, with a
smile.

'Equal to that of the contents of a mouldy nut.'

'Pretty much what I thought.'

'Oh, but it answers the purpose,' urged Dora, 'and it does no one any
harm.'

'Honest journey-work!' cried Jasper. 'There are few men in London
capable of such a feat. Many a fellow could write more in quantity, but
they couldn't command my market. It's rubbish, but rubbish of a very
special kind, of fine quality.'

Marian had not yet spoken, save a word or two in reply to Jasper's
greeting; now and then she just glanced at him, but for the most part
her eyes were cast down. Now Jasper addressed her.

'A year ago, Miss Yule, I shouldn't have believed myself capable of such
activity. In fact I wasn't capable of it then.'

'You think such work won't be too great a strain upon you?' she asked.

'Oh, this isn't a specimen day, you know. To-morrow I shall very likely
do nothing but finish my West End article, in an easy two or three
hours. There's no knowing; I might perhaps keep up the high pressure
if I tried. But then I couldn't dispose of all the work. Little by
little--or perhaps rather quicker than that--I shall extend my scope.
For instance, I should like to do two or three leaders a week for one of
the big dailies. I can't attain unto that just yet.'

'Not political leaders?'

'By no means. That's not my line. The kind of thing in which one makes a
column out of what would fill six lines of respectable prose. You call
a cigar a "convoluted weed," and so on, you know; that passes for
facetiousness. I've never really tried my hand at that style yet; I
shouldn't wonder if I managed it brilliantly. Some day I'll write a few
exercises; just take two lines of some good prose writer, and expand
them into twenty, in half-a-dozen different ways. Excellent mental
gymnastics!'

Marian listened to his flow of talk for a few minutes longer, then took
the opportunity of a brief silence to rise and put on her hat. Jasper
observed her, but without rising; he looked at his sisters in a
hesitating way. At length he stood up, and declared that he too must be
off. This coincidence had happened once before when he met Marian here
in the evening.

'At all events, you won't do any more work to-night,' said Dora.

'No; I shall read a page of something or other over a glass of whisky,
and seek the sleep of a man who has done his duty.'

'Why the whisky?' asked Maud.

'Do you grudge me such poor solace?'

'I don't see the need of it.'

'Nonsense, Maud!' exclaimed her sister. 'He needs a little stimulant
when he works so hard.'

Each of the girls gave Marian's hand a significant pressure as she took
leave of them, and begged her to come again as soon as she had a free
evening. There was gratitude in her eyes.

The evening was clear, and not very cold.

'It's rather late for you to go home,' said Jasper, as they left the
house. 'May I walk part of the way with you?'

Marian replied with a low 'Thank you.'

'I think you get on pretty well with the girls, don't you?'

'I hope they are as glad of my friendship as I am of theirs.'

'Pity to see them in a place like that, isn't it? They ought to have a
good house, with plenty of servants. It's bad enough for a civilised
man to have to rough it, but I hate to see women living in a sordid way.
Don't you think they could both play their part in a drawing-room, with
a little experience?'

'Surely there's no doubt of it.'

'Maud would look really superb if she were handsomely dressed. She
hasn't a common face, by any means. And Dora is pretty, I think. Well,
they shall go and see some people before long. The difficulty is, one
doesn't like it to be known that they live in such a crib; but I daren't
advise them to go in for expense. One can't be sure that it would repay
them, though--Now, in my own case, if I could get hold of a few thousand
pounds I should know how to use it with the certainty of return; it
would save me, probably, a clear ten years of life; I mean, I should go
at a jump to what I shall be ten years hence without the help of money.
But they have such a miserable little bit of capital, and everything is
still so uncertain. One daren't speculate under the circumstances.'

Marian made no reply.

'You think I talk of nothing but money?' Jasper said suddenly, looking
down into her face.

'I know too well what it means to be without money.'

'Yes, but--you do just a little despise me?'

'Indeed, I don't, Mr Milvain.'

'If that is sincere, I'm very glad. I take it in a friendly sense. I am
rather despicable, you know; it's part of my business to be so. But
a friend needn't regard that. There is the man apart from his
necessities.'

The silence was then unbroken till they came to the lower end of Park
Street, the junction of roads which lead to Hampstead, to Highgate, and
to Holloway.

'Shall you take an omnibus?' Jasper asked.

She hesitated.

'Or will you give me the pleasure of walking on with you? You are tired,
perhaps?'

'Not the least.'

For the rest of her answer she moved forward, and they crossed into the
obscurity of Camden Road.

'Shall I be doing wrong, Mr Milvain,' Marian began in a very low
voice, 'if I ask you about the authorship of something in this month's
Current?'

'I'm afraid I know what you refer to. There's no reason why I shouldn't
answer a question of the kind.'

'It was Mr Fadge himself who reviewed my father's book?'

'It was--confound him! I don't know another man who could have done the
thing so vilely well.'

'I suppose he was only replying to my father's attack upon him and his
friends.'

'Your father's attack is honest and straightforward and justifiable and
well put. I read that chapter of his book with huge satisfaction.
But has anyone suggested that another than Fadge was capable of that
masterpiece?'

'Yes. I am told that Mr Jedwood, the publisher, has somehow made a
mistake.'

'Jedwood? And what mistake?'

'Father heard that you were the writer.'

'I?' Jasper stopped short. They were in the rays of a street-lamp, and
could see each other's faces. 'And he believes that?'

'I'm afraid so.'

'And you believe--believed it?'

'Not for a moment.'

'I shall write a note to Mr Yule.'

Marian was silent a while, then said:

'Wouldn't it be better if you found a way of letting Mr Jedwood know the
truth?'

'Perhaps you are right.'

Jasper was very grateful for the suggestion. In that moment he had
reflected how rash it would be to write to Alfred Yule on such a
subject, with whatever prudence in expressing himself. Such a letter,
coming under the notice of the great Fadge, might do its writer serious
harm.

'Yes, you are right,' he repeated. 'I'll stop that rumour at its source.
I can't guess how it started; for aught I know, some enemy hath done
this, though I don't quite discern the motive. Thank you very much for
telling me, and still more for refusing to believe that I could treat Mr
Yule in that way, even as a matter of business. When I said that I was
despicable, I didn't mean that I could sink quite to such a point as
that. If only because it was your father--'

He checked himself and they walked on for several yards without
speaking.

'In that case,' Jasper resumed at length, 'your father doesn't think of
me in a very friendly way?'

'He scarcely could--'

'No, no. And I quite understand that the mere fact of my working for
Fadge would prejudice him against me. But that's no reason, I hope, why
you and I shouldn't be friends?'

'I hope not.'

'I don't know that my friendship is worth much,' Jasper continued,
talking into the upper air, a habit of his when he discussed his own
character. 'I shall go on as I have begun, and fight for some of the
good things of life. But your friendship is valuable. If I am sure of
it, I shall be at all events within sight of the better ideals.'

Marian walked on with her eyes upon the ground. To her surprise she
discovered presently that they had all but reached St Paul's Crescent.

