of the riverside about him; he might be a dockman, or even a bargeman.
He looked intelligent, however, and bore himself with much modesty.

'Now do endeavour to write in shorter sentences,' said Biffen, who sat
down by him and resumed the lesson, Reardon having taken up a volume.
'This isn't bad--it isn't bad at all, I assure you; but you have put all
you had to say into three appalling periods, whereas you ought to have
made about a dozen.'

'There it is, sir; there it is!' exclaimed the man, smoothing his wiry
hair. 'I can't break it up. The thoughts come in a lump, if I may say
so. To break it up--there's the art of compersition.'

Reardon could not refrain from a glance at the speaker, and Biffen,
whose manner was very grave and kindly, turned to his friend with an
explanation of the difficulties with which the student was struggling.

'Mr Baker is preparing for the examination of the outdoor Customs
Department. One of the subjects is English composition, and really, you
know, that isn't quite such a simple matter as some people think.'

Baker beamed upon the visitor with a homely, good-natured smile.

'I can make headway with the other things, sir,' he said, striking the
table lightly with his clenched fist. 'There's handwriting, there's
orthography, there's arithmetic; I'm not afraid of one of 'em, as Mr
Biffen'll tell you, sir. But when it comes to compersition, that brings
out the sweat on my forehead, I do assure you.

'You're not the only man in that case, Mr Baker,' replied Reardon.

'It's thought a tough job in general, is it, sir?'

'It is indeed.'

'Two hundred marks for compersition,' continued the man. 'Now how many
would they have given me for this bit of a try, Mr Biffen?'

'Well, well; I can't exactly say. But you improve; you improve,
decidedly. Peg away for another week or two.'

'Oh, don't fear me, sir! I'm not easily beaten when I've set my mind on
a thing, and I'll break up the compersition yet, see if I don't!'

Again his fist descended upon the table in a way that reminded one of
the steam-hammer cracking a nut.

The lesson proceeded for about ten minutes, Reardon, under pretence of
reading, following it with as much amusement as anything could excite
in him nowadays. At length Mr Baker stood up, collected his papers and
books, and seemed about to depart; but, after certain uneasy movements
and glances, he said to Biffen in a subdued voice:

'Perhaps I might speak to you outside the door a minute, sir?'

He and the teacher went out, the door closed, and Reardon heard sounds
of muffled conversation. In a minute or two a heavy footstep descended
the stairs, and Biffen re-entered the room.

'Now that's a good, honest fellow,' he said, in an amused tone. 'It's
my pay-night, but he didn't like to fork out money before you. A very
unusual delicacy in a man of that standing. He pays me sixpence for an
hour's lesson; that brings me two shillings a week. I sometimes feel a
little ashamed to take his money, but then the fact is he's a good deal
better off than I am.'

'Will he get a place in the Customs, do you think?'

'Oh, I've no doubt of it. If it seemed unlikely, I should have told him
so before this. To be sure, that's a point I have often to consider,
and once or twice my delicacy has asserted itself at the expense of my
pocket. There was a poor consumptive lad came to me not long ago and
wanted Latin lessons; talked about going in for the London Matric., on
his way to the pulpit. I couldn't stand it. After a lesson or two I told
him his cough was too bad, and he had no right to study until he got
into better health; that was better, I think, than saying plainly he had
no chance on earth. But the food I bought with his money was choking me.
Oh yes, Baker will make his way right enough. A good, modest fellow.

You noticed how respectfully he spoke to me? It doesn't make any
difference to him that I live in a garret like this; I'm a man of
education, and he can separate this fact from my surroundings.'

'Biffen, why don't you get some decent position? Surely you might.'

'What position? No school would take me; I have neither credentials
nor conventional clothing. For the same reason I couldn't get a private
tutorship in a rich family. No, no; it's all right. I keep myself alive,
and I get on with my work.--By-the-bye, I've decided to write a book
called "Mr Bailey, Grocer."'

'What's the idea?'

'An objectionable word, that. Better say: "What's the reality?" Well, Mr
Bailey is a grocer in a little street by here. I have dealt with him
for a long time, and as he's a talkative fellow I've come to know a good
deal about him and his history. He's fond of talking about the struggle
he had in his first year of business. He had no money of his own, but
he married a woman who had saved forty-five pounds out of a cat's-meat
business. You should see that woman! A big, coarse, squinting creature;
at the time of the marriage she was a widow and forty-two years old.
Now I'm going to tell the true story of Mr Bailey's marriage and of his
progress as a grocer. It'll be a great book--a great book!'

He walked up and down the room, fervid with his conception.

'There'll be nothing bestial in it, you know. The decently ignoble--as
I've so often said. The thing'll take me a year at least. I shall do
it slowly, lovingly. One volume, of course; the length of the ordinary
French novel. There's something fine in the title, don't you think? "Mr
Bailey, Grocer"!'

'I envy you, old fellow,' said Reardon, sighing. 'You have the right
fire in you; you have zeal and energy. Well, what do you think I have
decided to do?'

'I should like to hear.'

Reardon gave an account of his project. The other listened gravely,
seated across a chair with his arms on the back.

'Your wife is in agreement with this?'

'Oh yes.' He could not bring himself to say that Amy had suggested it.
'She has great hopes that the change will be just what I need.'

'I should say so too--if you were going to rest. But if you have to set
to work at once it seems to me very doubtful.'

'Never mind. For Heaven's sake don't discourage me! If this fails I
think--upon my soul, I think I shall kill myself.'

'Pooh!' exclaimed Biffen, gently. 'With a wife like yours?'

'Just because of that.'

'No, no; there'll be some way out of it. By-the-bye, I passed Mrs
Reardon this morning, but she didn't see me. It was in Tottenham Court
Road, and Milvain was with her. I felt myself too seedy in appearance to
stop and speak.'

'In Tottenham Court Road?'

That was not the detail of the story which chiefly held Reardon's
attention, yet he did not purposely make a misleading remark. His mind
involuntarily played this trick.

'I only saw them just as they were passing,' pursued Biffen. 'Oh, I knew
I had something to tell you! Have you heard that Whelpdale is going to
be married?'

Reardon shook his head in a preoccupied way.

'I had a note from him this morning, telling me. He asked me to look him
up to-night, and he'd let me know all about it. Let's go together, shall
we?'

'I don't feel much in the humour for Whelpdale. I'll walk with you, and
go on home.'

'No, no; come and see him. It'll do you good to talk a little.--But I
must positively eat a mouthful before we go. I'm afraid you won't care
to join?'

He opened his cupboard, and brought out a loaf of bread and a saucer of
dripping, with salt and pepper.

'Better dripping this than I've had for a long time. I get it at Mr
Bailey's--that isn't his real name, of course. He assures me it comes
from a large hotel where his wife's sister is a kitchen-maid, and that
it's perfectly pure; they very often mix flour with it, you know, and
perhaps more obnoxious things that an economical man doesn't care
to reflect upon. Now, with a little pepper and salt, this bread and
dripping is as appetising food as I know. I often make a dinner of it.'

'I have done the same myself before now. Do you ever buy pease-pudding?'

'I should think so! I get magnificent pennyworths at a shop in Cleveland
Street, of a very rich quality indeed. Excellent faggots they have
there, too. I'll give you a supper of them some night before you go.'

Biffen rose to enthusiasm in the contemplation of these dainties.

He ate his bread and dripping with knife and fork; this always made the
fare seem more substantial.

'Is it very cold out?' he asked, rising from the table. 'Need I put my
overcoat on?'

This overcoat, purchased second-hand three years ago, hung on a
door-nail. Comparative ease of circumstances had restored to the
realist his ordinary indoor garment--a morning coat of the cloth called
diagonal, rather large for him, but in better preservation than the
other articles of his attire.

Reardon judging the overcoat necessary, his friend carefully brushed it
and drew it on with a caution which probably had reference to
starting seams. Then he put into the pocket his pipe, his pouch, his
tobacco-stopper, and his matches, murmuring to himself a Greek iambic
line which had come into his head a propos of nothing obvious.

'Go out,' he said, 'and then I'll extinguish the lamp. Mind the second
step down, as usual.'

They issued into Clipstone Street, turned northward, crossed Euston
Road, and came into Albany Street, where, in a house of decent exterior,
Mr Whelpdale had his present abode. A girl who opened the door requested
them to walk up to the topmost storey.

A cheery voice called to them from within the room at which they
knocked. This lodging spoke more distinctly of civilisation than that
inhabited by Biffen; it contained the minimum supply of furniture needed
to give it somewhat the appearance of a study, but the articles were in
good condition. One end of the room was concealed by a chintz curtain;
scrutiny would have discovered behind the draping the essential
equipments of a bedchamber.

Mr Whelpdale sat by the fire, smoking a cigar. He was a plain-featured
but graceful and refined-looking man of thirty, with wavy chestnut
hair and a trimmed beard which became him well. At present he wore a
dressing-gown and was without collar.

'Welcome, gents both!' he cried facetiously. 'Ages since I saw you,
Reardon. I've been reading your new book. Uncommonly good things in it
here and there--uncommonly good.'

Whelpdale had the weakness of being unable to tell a disagreeable
truth, and a tendency to flattery which had always made Reardon rather
uncomfortable in his society. Though there was no need whatever of his
mentioning 'Margaret Home,' he preferred to frame smooth fictions rather
than keep a silence which might be construed as unfavourable criticism.

'In the last volume,' he went on, 'I think there are one or two things
as good as you ever did; I do indeed.'

Reardon made no acknowledgment of these remarks. They irritated him, for
he knew their insincerity. Biffen, understanding his friend's silence,
struck in on another subject.

'Who is this lady of whom you write to me?'

'Ah, quite a story! I'm going to be married, Reardon. A serious
marriage. Light your pipes, and I'll tell you all about it. Startled
you, I suppose, Biffen? Unlikely news, eh? Some people would call it a
rash step, I dare say. We shall just take another room in this house,
that's all. I think I can count upon an income of a couple of guineas
a week, and I have plans without end that are pretty sure to bring in
coin.'

Reardon did not care to smoke, but Biffen lit his pipe and waited with
grave interest for the romantic narrative. Whenever he heard of a poor
man's persuading a woman to share his poverty he was eager of details;
perchance he himself might yet have that heavenly good fortune.

'Well,' began Whelpdale, crossing his legs and watching a wreath he had
just puffed from the cigar, 'you know all about my literary advisership.
The business goes on reasonably well. I'm going to extend it in ways
I'll explain to you presently. About six weeks ago I received a letter
from a lady who referred to my advertisements, and said she had the
manuscript of a novel which she would like to offer for my opinion. Two
publishers had refused it, but one with complimentary phrases, and she
hoped it mightn't be impossible to put the thing into acceptable shape.
Of course I wrote optimistically, and the manuscript was sent to me.

Well, it wasn't actually bad--by Jove! you should have seen some of
the things I have been asked to recommend to publishers! It wasn't
hopelessly bad by any means, and I gave serious thought to it. After
exchange of several letters I asked the authoress to come and see me,
that we might save postage stamps and talk things over. She hadn't
given me her address: I had to direct to a stationer's in Bayswater. She
agreed to come, and did come. I had formed a sort of idea, but of course
I was quite wrong. Imagine my excitement when there came in a
very beautiful girl, a tremendously interesting girl, about
one-and-twenty--just the kind of girl that most strongly appeals to
me; dark, pale, rather consumptive-looking, slender--no, there's no
describing her; there really isn't! You must wait till you see her.'

'I hope the consumption was only a figure of speech,' remarked Biffen in
his grave way.

'Oh, there's nothing serious the matter, I think. A slight cough, poor
girl.'

'The deuce!' interjected Reardon.

'Oh, nothing, nothing! It'll be all right. Well, now, of course we
talked over the story--in good earnest, you know. Little by little I
induced her to speak of herself--this, after she'd come two or three
times--and she told me lamentable things. She was absolutely alone in
London, and hadn't had sufficient food for weeks; had sold all she could
of her clothing; and so on. Her home was in Birmingham; she had been
driven away by the brutality of a stepmother; a friend lent her a few
pounds, and she came to London with an unfinished novel. Well, you know,
this kind of thing would be enough to make me soft-hearted to any girl,
let alone one who, to begin with, was absolutely my ideal. When she
began to express a fear that I was giving too much time to her, that she
wouldn't be able to pay my fees, and so on, I could restrain myself
no longer. On the spot I asked her to marry me. I didn't practise any
deception, mind. I told her I was a poor devil who had failed as a
realistic novelist and was earning bread in haphazard ways; and I
explained frankly that I thought we might carry on various kinds of
business together: she might go on with her novel-writing, and--so on.
But she was frightened; I had been too abrupt. That's a fault of mine,
you know; but I was so confoundedly afraid of losing her. And I told her
as much, plainly.'

Biffen smiled.

'This would be exciting,' he said, 'if we didn't know the end of the
story.'

'Yes. Pity I didn't keep it a secret. Well, she wouldn't say yes, but
I could see that she didn't absolutely say no. "In any case," I said,
"you'll let me see you often? Fees be hanged! I'll work day and night
for you. I'll do my utmost to get your novel accepted." And I implored
her to let me lend her a little money. It was very difficult to persuade
her, but at last she accepted a few shillings. I could see in her face
that she was hungry. Just imagine! A beautiful girl absolutely hungry;
it drove me frantic!

But that was a great point gained. After that we saw each other almost
every day, and at last--she consented! Did indeed! I can hardly believe
it yet. We shall be married in a fortnight's time.'

'I congratulate you,' said Reardon.

'So do I,' sighed Biffen.

'The day before yesterday she went to Birmingham to see her father and
tell him all about the affair. I agreed with her it was as well; the old
fellow isn't badly off; and he may forgive her for running away, though
he's under his wife's thumb, it appears. I had a note yesterday. She had
gone to a friend's house for the first day. I hoped to have heard again
this morning--must to-morrow, in any case. I live, as you may imagine,
in wild excitement. Of course, if the old man stumps up a wedding
present, all the better. But I don't care; we'll make a living somehow.
What do you think I'm writing just now? An author's Guide. You know the
kind of thing; they sell splendidly. Of course I shall make it a good
advertisement of my business. Then I have a splendid idea. I'm going to
advertise: "Novel-writing taught in ten lessons!" What do you think
of that? No swindle; not a bit of it. I am quite capable of giving the
ordinary man or woman ten very useful lessons. I've been working out the
scheme; it would amuse you vastly, Reardon. The first lesson deals with
the question of subjects, local colour--that kind of thing. I gravely
advise people, if they possibly can, to write of the wealthy middle
class; that's the popular subject, you know. Lords and ladies are all
very well, but the real thing to take is a story about people who have
no titles, but live in good Philistine style. I urge study of horsey
matters especially; that's very important. You must be well up, too,
in military grades, know about Sandhurst, and so on. Boating is an
important topic. You see? Oh, I shall make a great thing of this. I
shall teach my wife carefully, and then let her advertise lessons to
girls; they'll prefer coming to a woman, you know.'

Biffen leant back and laughed noisily.

'How much shall you charge for the course?' asked Reardon.

'That'll depend. I shan't refuse a guinea or two; but some people may be
made to pay five, perhaps.'

Someone knocked at the door, and a voice said:

'A letter for you, Mr Whelpdale.'

He started up, and came back into the room with face illuminated.

'Yes, it's from Birmingham; posted this morning. Look what an exquisite
hand she writes!'

He tore open the envelope. In delicacy Reardon and Biffen averted their
eyes. There was silence for a minute, then a strange ejaculation from
Whelpdale caused his friends to look up at him. He had gone pale, and
was frowning at the sheet of paper which trembled in his hand.

'No bad news, I hope?' Biffen ventured to say.

Whelpdale let himself sink into a chair.

'Now if this isn't too bad!' he exclaimed in a thick voice. 'If
this isn't monstrously unkind! I never heard anything so gross as
this--never!'

The two waited, trying not to smile.

'She writes--that she has met an old lover--in Birmingham--that it was
with him she had quarrelled-not with her father at all--that she ran
away to annoy him and frighten him--that she has made it up again, and
they're going to be married!'

He let the sheet fall, and looked so utterly woebegone that his friends
at once exerted themselves to offer such consolation as the case
admitted of. Reardon thought better of Whelpdale for this emotion; he
had not believed him capable of it.

'It isn't a case of vulgar cheating!' cried the forsaken one presently.
'Don't go away thinking that. She writes in real distress and
penitence--she does indeed. Oh, the devil! Why did I let her go to
Birmingham? A fortnight more, and I should have had her safe. But it's
just like my luck. Do you know that this is the third time I've been
engaged to be married?--no, by Jove, the fourth! And every time the girl
has got out of it at the last moment. What an unlucky beast I am! A girl
who was positively my ideal! I haven't even a photograph of her to show
you; but you'd be astonished at her face. Why, in the devil's name, did
I let her go to Birmingham?'

The visitors had risen. They felt uncomfortable, for it seemed as if
Whelpdale might find vent for his distress in tears.

'We had better leave you,' suggested Biffen. 'It's very hard--it is
indeed.'

'Look here! Read the letter for yourselves! Do!'

They declined, and begged him not to insist.

'But I want you to see what kind of girl she is. It isn't a case of
farcical deceiving--not a bit of it! She implores me to forgive her, and
blames herself no end. Just my luck! The third--no, the fourth time, by
Jove! Never was such an unlucky fellow with women. It's because I'm so
damnably poor; that's it, of course!'

Reardon and his companion succeeded at length in getting away, though
not till they had heard the virtues and beauty of the vanished girl
described again and again in much detail. Both were in a state of
depression as they left the house.

'What think you of this story?' asked Biffen. 'Is this possible in a
woman of any merit?'

'Anything is possible in a woman,' Reardon replied, harshly.

They walked in silence as far as Portland Road Station. There, with an
assurance that he would come to a garret-supper before leaving London,
Reardon parted from his friend and turned westward.

As soon as he had entered, Amy's voice called to him:

'Here's a letter from Jedwood, Edwin!'

He stepped into the study.

'It came just after you went out, and it has been all I could do to
resist the temptation to open it.'

'Why shouldn't you have opened it?' said her husband, carelessly.

He tried to do so himself, but his shaking hand thwarted him at first.
Succeeding at length, he found a letter in the publisher's own writing,
and the first word that caught his attention was 'regret.' With an angry
effort to command himself he ran through the communication, then held it
out to Amy.

She read, and her countenance fell. Mr Jedwood regretted that the story
offered to him did not seem likely to please that particular public to
whom his series of one-volume novels made appeal. He hoped it would
be understood that, in declining, he by no means expressed an adverse
judgment on the story itself &c.

'It doesn't surprise me,' said Reardon. 'I believe he is quite right.
The thing is too empty to please the better kind of readers, yet not
vulgar enough to please the worse.'

'But you'll try someone else?'

'I don't think it's much use.'

They sat opposite each other, and kept silence. Jedwood's letter slipped
from Amy's lap to the ground.

'So,' said Reardon, presently, 'I don't see how our plan is to be
carried out.'

'Oh, it must be!'

'But how?'

'You'll get seven or eight pounds from The Wayside. And--hadn't we
better sell the furniture, instead of--'

His look checked her.

'It seems to me, Amy, that your one desire is to get away from me, on
whatever terms.'

'Don't begin that over again!' she exclaimed, fretfully. 'If you don't
believe what I say--'

They were both in a state of intolerable nervous tension. Their voices
quivered, and their eyes had an unnatural brightness.

'If we sell the furniture,' pursued Reardon, 'that means you'll never
come back to me. You wish to save yourself and the child from the hard
life that seems to be before us.'

'Yes, I do; but not by deserting you. I want you to go and work for us
all, so that we may live more happily before long. Oh, how wretched this
is!'

She burst into hysterical weeping. But Reardon, instead of attempting to
soothe her, went into the next room, where he sat for a long time in
the dark. When he returned Amy was calm again; her face expressed a cold
misery.

'Where did you go this morning?' he asked, as if wishing to talk of
common things.

'I told you. I went to buy those things for Willie.'

'Oh yes.'

There was a silence.

'Biffen passed you in Tottenham Court Road,' he added.

'I didn't see him.'

'No; he said you didn't.'

'Perhaps,' said Amy, 'it was just when I was speaking to Mr Milvain.'

'You met Milvain?'

'Yes.'

'Why didn't you tell me?'

'I'm sure I don't know. I can't mention every trifle that happens.'

'No, of course not.'

Amy closed her eyes, as if in weariness, and for a minute or two Reardon
observed her countenance.

'So you think we had better sell the furniture.'

'I shall say nothing more about it. You must do as seems best to you,
Edwin.'

'Are you going to see your mother to-morrow?'

'Yes. I thought you would like to come too.'

'No; there's no good in my going.'

He again rose, and that night they talked no more of their difficulties,
though on the morrow (Sunday) it would be necessary to decide their
course in every detail.



CHAPTER XVII. THE PARTING

Amy did not go to church. Before her marriage she had done so as a mere
matter of course, accompanying her mother, but Reardon's attitude with
regard to the popular religion speedily became her own; she let the
subject lapse from her mind, and cared neither to defend nor to attack
where dogma was concerned. She had no sympathies with mysticism; her
nature was strongly practical, with something of zeal for intellectual
attainment superadded.

This Sunday morning she was very busy with domestic minutiae. Reardon
noticed what looked like preparations for packing, and being as little
disposed for conversation as his wife, he went out and walked for a
couple of hours in the Hampstead region. Dinner over, Amy at once made
ready for her journey to Westbourne Park.

'Then you won't come?' she said to her husband.

'No. I shall see your mother before I go away, but I don't care to till
you have settled everything.'

It was half a year since he had met Mrs Yule. She never came to their
dwelling, and Reardon could not bring himself to visit her.

'You had very much rather we didn't sell the furniture?' Amy asked.

'Ask your mother's opinion. That shall decide.'

'There'll be the expense of moving it, you know. Unless money comes from
The Wayside, you'll only have two or three pounds left.'

Reardon made no reply. He was overcome by the bitterness of shame.

'I shall say, then,' pursued Amy, who spoke with averted face, 'that I
am to go there for good on Tuesday? I mean, of course, for the summer
months.'

'I suppose so.'

Then he turned suddenly upon her.

'Do you really imagine that at the end of the summer I shall be a rich
man? What do you mean by talking in this way? If the furniture is sold
to supply me with a few pounds for the present, what prospect is there
that I shall be able to buy new?'

'How can we look forward at all?' replied Amy. 'It has come to the
question of how we are to subsist. I thought you would rather get money
in this way than borrow of mother--when she has the expense of keeping
me and Willie.'

'You are right,' muttered Reardon. 'Do as you think best.' Amy was in
her most practical mood, and would not linger for purposeless talk. A
few minutes, and Reardon was left alone.

He stood before his bookshelves and began to pick out the volumes which
he would take away with him. Just a few, the indispensable companions of
a bookish man who still clings to life--his Homer, his Shakespeare--

The rest must be sold. He would get rid of them to-morrow morning. All
together they might bring him a couple of sovereigns.

Then his clothing. Amy had fulfilled all the domestic duties of a wife;
his wardrobe was in as good a state as circumstances allowed. But there
was no object in burdening himself with winter garments, for, if he
lived through the summer at all, he would be able to repurchase such few
poor things as were needful; at present he could only think of how to
get together a few coins. So he made a heap of such things as might be
sold.

The furniture? If it must go, the price could scarcely be more than ten
or twelve pounds; well, perhaps fifteen. To be sure, in this way his
summer's living would be abundantly provided for.

He thought of Biffen enviously. Biffen, if need be, could support life
on three or four shillings a week, happy in the thought that no mortal
had a claim upon him. If he starved to death--well, many another lonely
man has come to that end. If he preferred to kill himself, who would be
distressed? Spoilt child of fortune!

The bells of St Marylebone began to clang for afternoon service. In
the idleness of dull pain his thoughts followed their summons, and he
marvelled that there were people who could imagine it a duty or find it
a solace to go and sit in that twilight church and listen to the droning
of prayers. He thought of the wretched millions of mankind to whom life
is so barren that they must needs believe in a recompense beyond the
grave. For that he neither looked nor longed. The bitterness of his
lot was that this world might be a sufficing paradise to him if only he
could clutch a poor little share of current coin. He had won the world's
greatest prize--a woman's love--but could not retain it because his
pockets were empty.

That he should fail to make a great name, this was grievous
disappointment to Amy, but this alone would not have estranged her. It
was the dread and shame of penury that made her heart cold to him. And
he could not in his conscience scorn her for being thus affected by the
vulgar circumstances of life; only a few supreme natures stand unshaken
under such a trial, and though his love of Amy was still passionate, he
knew that her place was among a certain class of women, and not on the
isolated pinnacle where he had at first visioned her. It was entirely
natural that she shrank at the test of squalid suffering. A little
money, and he could have rested secure in her love, for then he would
have been able to keep ever before her the best qualities of his heart
and brain. Upon him, too, penury had its debasing effect; as he now
presented himself he was not a man to be admired or loved. It was all
simple and intelligible enough--a situation that would be misread only
by shallow idealism.

Worst of all, she was attracted by Jasper Milvain's energy and promise
of success. He had no ignoble suspicions of Amy, but it was impossible
for him not to see that she habitually contrasted the young journalist,
who laughingly made his way among men, with her grave, dispirited
husband, who was not even capable of holding such position as he had
gained. She enjoyed Milvain's conversation, it put her into a good
humour; she liked him personally, and there could be no doubt that she
had observed a jealous tendency in Reardon's attitude to his former
friend--always a harmful suggestion to a woman. Formerly she had
appreciated her husband's superiority; she had smiled at Milvain's
commoner stamp of mind and character. But tedious repetition of failure
had outwearied her, and now she saw Milvain in the sunshine of progress,
dwelt upon the worldly advantages of gifts and a temperament such as
his. Again, simple and intelligible enough.

Living apart from her husband, she could not be expected to forswear
society, and doubtless she would see Milvain pretty often. He called
occasionally at Mrs Yule's, and would not do so less often when he knew
that Amy was to be met there. There would be chance encounters like that
of yesterday, of which she had chosen to keep silence.

A dark fear began to shadow him. In yielding thus passively to stress of
circumstances, was he not exposing his wife to a danger which outweighed
all the ills of poverty? As one to whom she was inestimably dear, was
he right in allowing her to leave him, if only for a few months? He knew
very well that a man of strong character would never have entertained
this project. He had got into the way of thinking of himself as too weak
to struggle against the obstacles on which Amy insisted, and of looking
for safety in retreat; but what was to be the end of this weakness if
the summer did not at all advance him? He knew better than Amy could how
unlikely it was that he should recover the energies of his mind in
so short a time and under such circumstances; only the feeble man's
temptation to postpone effort had made him consent to this step, and
now that he was all but beyond turning back, the perils of which he had
thought too little forced themselves upon his mind.

He rose in anguish, and stood looking about him as if aid might
somewhere be visible.

Presently there was a knock at the front door, and on opening he beheld
the vivacious Mr Carter. This gentleman had only made two or three calls
here since Reardon's marriage; his appearance was a surprise.

'I hear you are leaving town for a time,' he exclaimed. 'Edith told me
yesterday, so I thought I'd look you up.'

He was in spring costume, and exhaled fresh odours. The contrast between
his prosperous animation and Reardon's broken-spirited quietness could
not have been more striking.

'Going away for your health, they tell me. You've been working too hard,
you know. You mustn't overdo it. And where do you think of going to?'

'It isn't at all certain that I shall go,' Reardon replied. 'I thought
of a few weeks--somewhere at the seaside.'

'I advise you to go north,' went on Carter cheerily. 'You want a tonic,
you know. Get up into Scotland and do some boating and fishing--that
kind of thing. You'd come back a new man. Edith and I had a turn up
there last year, you know; it did me heaps of good.'

'Oh, I don't think I should go so far as that.'

'But that's just what you want--a regular change, something bracing. You
don't look at all well, that's the fact. A winter in London tries any
man--it does me, I know. I've been seedy myself these last few weeks.
Edith wants me to take her over to Paris at the end of this month, and
I think it isn't a bad idea; but I'm so confoundedly busy. In the autumn
we shall go to Norway, I think; it seems to be the right thing to do
nowadays. Why shouldn't you have a run over to Norway? They say it can
be done very cheaply; the steamers take you for next to nothing.'

He talked on with the joyous satisfaction of a man whose income is
assured, and whose future teems with a succession of lively holidays.
Reardon could make no answer to such suggestions; he sat with a fixed
smile on his face.

'Have you heard,' said Carter, presently, 'that we're opening a branch
of the hospital in the City Road?'

'No; I hadn't heard of it.'

'It'll only be for out-patients. Open three mornings and three evenings
alternately.'

'Who'll represent you there?''I shall look in now and then, of course;
there'll be a clerk, like at the old place.'

He talked of the matter in detail--of the doctors who would attend, and
of certain new arrangements to be tried.

'Have you engaged the clerk?' Reardon asked.

'Not yet. I think I know a man who'll suit me, though.'

'You wouldn't be disposed to give me the chance?'

Reardon spoke huskily, and ended with a broken laugh.

'You're rather above my figure nowadays, old man!' exclaimed Carter,
joining in what he considered the jest.

'Shall you pay a pound a week?'

'Twenty-five shillings. It'll have to be a man who can be trusted to
take money from the paying patients.'

'Well, I am serious. Will you give me the place?'

Carter gazed at him, and checked another laugh.

'What the deuce do you mean?'

'The fact is,' Reardon replied, 'I want variety of occupation. I can't
stick at writing for more than a month or two at a time. It's because I
have tried to do so that--well, practically, I have broken down. If you
will give me this clerkship, it will relieve me from the necessity of
perpetually writing novels; I shall be better for it in every way. You
know that I'm equal to the job; you can trust me; and I dare say I shall
be more useful than most clerks you could get.'

It was done, most happily done, on the first impulse. A minute more of
pause, and he could not have faced the humiliation. His face burned, his
tongue was parched.

'I'm floored!' cried Carter. 'I shouldn't have thought--but of course,
if you really want it. I can hardly believe yet that you're serious,
Reardon.'

'Why not? Will you promise me the work?'

'Well, yes.'

'When shall I have to begin?'

'The place'll be opened to-morrow week. But how about your holiday?'

'Oh, let that stand over. It'll be holiday enough to occupy myself in a
new way. An old way, too; I shall enjoy it.'

He laughed merrily, relieved beyond measure at having come to what
seemed an end of his difficulties. For half an hour they continued to
talk over the affair.

'Well, it's a comical idea,' said Carter, as he took his leave, 'but you
know your own business best.'

When Amy returned, Reardon allowed her to put the child to bed before he
sought any conversation. She came at length and sat down in the study.

'Mother advises us not to sell the furniture,' were her first words.

'I'm glad of that, as I had quite made up my mind not to.' There was a
change in his way of speaking which she at once noticed.

'Have you thought of something?'

'Yes. Carter has been here, and he happened to mention that they're
opening an out-patient department of the hospital, in the City Road.
He'll want someone to help him there. I asked for the post, and he
promised it me.'

The last words were hurried, though he had resolved to speak with
deliberation. No more feebleness; he had taken a decision, and would act
upon it as became a responsible man.

'The post?' said Amy. 'What post?'

'In plain English, the clerkship. It'll be the same work as I used to
have--registering patients, receiving their "letters," and so on. The
pay is to be five-and-twenty shillings a week.'

Amy sat upright and looked steadily at him.

'Is this a joke?'

'Far from it, dear. It's a blessed deliverance.'

'You have asked Mr Carter to take you back as a clerk?'

'I have.'

'And you propose that we shall live on twenty-five shillings a week?'

'Oh no! I shall be engaged only three mornings in the week and three
evenings. In my free time I shall do literary work, and no doubt I can
earn fifty pounds a year by it--if I have your sympathy to help me.
To-morrow I shall go and look for rooms some distance from here; in
Islington, I think. We have been living far beyond our means; that must
come to an end. We'll have no more keeping up of sham appearances. If I
can make my way in literature, well and good; in that case our position
and prospects will of course change. But for the present we are poor
people, and must live in a poor way. If our friends like to come and see
us, they must put aside all snobbishness, and take us as we are. If they
prefer not to come, there'll be an excuse in our remoteness.'

Amy was stroking the back of her hand. After a long silence, she said in
a very quiet, but very resolute tone:

'I shall not consent to this.'

'In that case, Amy, I must do without your consent. The rooms will be
taken, and our furniture transferred to them.'

'To me that will make no difference,' returned his wife, in the same
voice as before. 'I have decided--as you told me to--to go with Willie
to mother's next Tuesday. You, of course, must do as you please. I
should have thought a summer at the seaside would have been more helpful
to you; but if you prefer to live in Islington--'

Reardon approached her, and laid a hand on her shoulder.

'Amy, are you my wife, or not?'

'I am certainly not the wife of a clerk who is paid so much a week.'

He had foreseen a struggle, but without certainty of the form Amy's
opposition would take. For himself he meant to be gently resolute,
calmly regardless of protest. But in a man to whom such self-assertion
is a matter of conscious effort, tremor of the nerves will always
interfere with the line of conduct he has conceived in advance.
Already Reardon had spoken with far more bluntness than he proposed;
involuntarily, his voice slipped from earnest determination to the
note of absolutism, and, as is wont to be the case, the sound of these
strange tones instigated him to further utterances of the same kind.
He lost control of himself. Amy's last reply went through him like an
electric shock, and for the moment he was a mere husband defied by
his wife, the male stung to exertion of his brute force against the
physically weaker sex.

'However you regard me, you will do what I think fit. I shall not argue
with you. If I choose to take lodgings in Whitechapel, there you will
come and live.'

He met Amy's full look, and was conscious of that in it which
corresponded to his own brutality. She had become suddenly a much
older woman; her cheeks were tight drawn into thinness, her lips were
bloodlessly hard, there was an unknown furrow along her forehead, and
she glared like the animal that defends itself with tooth and claw.

'Do as YOU think fit? Indeed!'

Could Amy's voice sound like that? Great Heaven! With just such accent
he had heard a wrangling woman retort upon her husband at the street
corner. Is there then no essential difference between a woman of this
world and one of that? Does the same nature lie beneath such unlike
surfaces?

He had but to do one thing: to seize her by the arm, drag her up
from the chair, dash her back again with all his force--there, the
transformation would be complete, they would stand towards each other
on the natural footing. With an added curse perhaps--Instead of that, he
choked, struggled for breath, and shed tears.

Amy turned scornfully away from him. Blows and a curse would have
overawed her, at all events for the moment; she would have felt: 'Yes,
he is a man, and I have put my destiny into his hands.' His tears
moved her to a feeling cruelly exultant; they were the sign of her
superiority. It was she who should have wept, and never in her life had
she been further from such display of weakness.

This could not be the end, however, and she had no wish to terminate
the scene. They stood for a minute without regarding each other, then
Reardon faced to her.

'You refuse to live with me, then?'

'Yes, if this is the kind of life you offer me.'

'You would be more ashamed to share your husband's misfortunes than to
declare to everyone that you had deserted him?'

'I shall "declare to everyone" the simple truth. You have the
opportunity of making one more effort to save us from degradation. You
refuse to take the trouble; you prefer to drag me down into a lower rank
of life. I can't and won't consent to that. The disgrace is yours; it's
fortunate for me that I have a decent home to go to.'

'Fortunate for you!--you make yourself unutterably contemptible. I have
done nothing that justifies you in leaving me. It is for me to judge
what I can do and what I can't. A good woman would see no degradation in
what I ask of you. But to run away from me just because I am poorer than
you ever thought I should be--'

He was incoherent. A thousand passionate things that he wished to say
clashed together in his mind and confused his speech. Defeated in
the attempt to act like a strong man, he could not yet recover
standing-ground, knew not how to tone his utterances.

'Yes, of course, that's how you will put it,' said Amy. 'That's how you
will represent me to your friends. My friends will see it in a different
light.'

'They will regard you as a martyr?'

'No one shall make a martyr of me, you may be sure. I was unfortunate
enough to marry a man who had no delicacy, no regard for my feelings.--I
am not the first woman who has made a mistake of this kind.'

'No delicacy? No regard for your feelings?--Have I always utterly
misunderstood you? Or has poverty changed you to a woman I can't
recognise?'

He came nearer, and gazed desperately into her face. Not a muscle of it
showed susceptibility to the old influences.

'Do you know, Amy,' he added in a lower voice, 'that if we part now, we
part for ever?'

'I'm afraid that is only too likely.'

She moved aside.

'You mean that you wish it. You are weary of me, and care for nothing
but how to make yourself free.'

'I shall argue no more. I am tired to death of it.'

'Then say nothing, but listen for the last time to my view of the
position we have come to. When I consented to leave you for a time, to
go away and try to work in solitude, I was foolish and even insincere,
both to you and to myself. I knew that I was undertaking the impossible.
It was just putting off the evil day, that was all--putting off the time
when I should have to say plainly: "I can't live by literature, so I
must look out for some other employment." I shouldn't have been so weak
but that I knew how you would regard such a decision as that. I was
afraid to tell the truth--afraid. Now, when Carter of a sudden put this
opportunity before me, I saw all the absurdity of the arrangements we
had made. It didn't take me a moment to make up my mind. Anything was
to be chosen rather than a parting from you on false pretences, a
ridiculous affectation of hope where there was no hope.'

He paused, and saw that his words had no effect upon her.

'And a grievous share of the fault lies with you, Amy. You remember very
well when I first saw how dark the future was. I was driven even to say
that we ought to change our mode of living; I asked you if you would be
willing to leave this place and go into cheaper rooms. And you know what
your answer was. Not a sign in you that you would stand by me if the
worst came. I knew then what I had to look forward to, but I durst not
believe it. I kept saying to myself: "She loves me, and as soon as she
