moment saying I wished it were possible to refer a question to you.'

Dora reddened, and stood in an embarrassed attitude.

'It was the old dispute whether women in general are capable of logic.
But pardon me, Miss Yule; I forget that you have been occupied with sad
things since I last saw you.'

Dora led her to a chair, asking if her father had returned.

'Yes, he came back yesterday.'

Jasper and his sister could not think it likely that Marian had suffered
much from grief at her uncle's death; practically John Yule was a
stranger to her. Yet her face bore the signs of acute mental trouble,
and it seemed as if some agitation made it difficult for her to speak.
The awkward silence that fell upon the three was broken by Jasper, who
expressed a regret that he was obliged to take his leave.

'Maud is becoming a young lady of society,' he said--just for the sake
of saying something--as he moved towards the door. 'If she comes back
whilst you are here, Miss Yule, warn her that that is the path of
destruction for literary people.'

'You should bear that in mind yourself' remarked Dora, with a
significant look.

'Oh, I am cool-headed enough to make society serve my own ends.'

Marian turned her head with a sudden movement which was checked before
she had quite looked round to him. The phrase he uttered last appeared
to have affected her in some way; her eyes fell, and an expression of
pain was on her brows for a moment.

'I can only stay a few minutes,' she said, bending with a faint smile
towards Dora, as soon as they were alone. 'I have come on my way from
the Museum.'

'Where you have tired yourself to death as usual, I can see.'

'No; I have done scarcely anything. I only pretended to read; my mind is
too much troubled. Have you heard anything about my uncle's will?'

'Nothing whatever.'

'I thought it might have been spoken of in Wattleborough, and some
friend might have written to you. But I suppose there has hardly been
time for that. I shall surprise you very much. Father receives nothing,
but I have a legacy of five thousand pounds.'

Dora kept her eyes down.

'Then--what do you think?' continued Marian. 'My cousin Amy has ten
thousand pounds.'

'Good gracious! What a difference that will make!'

'Yes, indeed. And her brother John has six thousand. But nothing to
their mother. There are a good many other legacies, but most of
the property goes to the Wattleborough park--"Yule Park" it will be
called--and to the volunteers, and things of that kind. They say he
wasn't as rich as people thought.'

'Do you know what Miss Harrow gets?'

'She has the house for her life, and fifteen hundred pounds.'

'And your father nothing whatever?'

'Nothing. Not a penny. Oh I am so grieved! I think it so unkind, so
wrong. Amy and her brother to have sixteen thousand pounds and father
nothing! I can't understand it. There was no unkind feeling between him
and father. He knew what a hard life father has had. Doesn't it seem
heartless?'

'What does your father say?'

'I think he feels the unkindness more than he does the disappointment;
of course he must have expected something. He came into the room where
mother and I were, and sat down, and began to tell us about the will
just as if he were speaking to strangers about something he had read in
the newspaper--that's the only way I can describe it. Then he got up and
went away into the study. I waited a little, and then went to him there;
he was sitting at work, as if he hadn't been away from home at all. I
tried to tell him how sorry I was, but I couldn't say anything. I began
to cry foolishly. He spoke kindly to me, far more kindly than he has
done for a long time; but he wouldn't talk about the will, and I had to
go away and leave him. Poor mother! for all she was afraid that we were
going to be rich, is broken-hearted at his disappointment.'

'Your mother was afraid?' said Dora.

'Because she thought herself unfitted for life in a large house, and
feared we should think her in our way.' She smiled sadly. 'Poor mother!
she is so humble and so good. I do hope that father will be kinder to
her. But there's no telling yet what the result of this may be. I feel
guilty when I stand before him.'

'But he must feel glad that you have five thousand pounds.'

Marian delayed her reply for a moment, her eyes down.

'Yes, perhaps he is glad of that.'

'Perhaps!'

'He can't help thinking, Dora, what use he could have made of it.

It has always been his greatest wish to have a literary paper of his
own--like The Study, you know. He would have used the money in that way,
I am sure.'

'But, all the same, he ought to feel pleasure in your good fortune.'

Marian turned to another subject.

'Think of the Reardons; what a change all at once! What will they do, I
wonder? Surely they won't continue to live apart?'

'We shall hear from Jasper.'

Whilst they were discussing the affairs of that branch of the family,
Maud returned. There was ill-humour on her handsome face, and she
greeted Marian but coldly. Throwing off her hat and gloves and mantle
she listened to the repeated story of John Yule's bequests.

'But why ever has Mrs Reardon so much more than anyone else?' she asked.

'We can only suppose it is because she was the favourite child of the
brother he liked best. Yet at her wedding he gave her nothing, and spoke
contemptuously of her for marrying a literary man.'

'Fortunate for her poor husband that her uncle was able to forgive her.
I wonder what's the date of the will? Who knows but he may have rewarded
her for quarrelling with Mr Reardon.'

This excited a laugh.

'I don't know when the will was made,' said Marian. 'And I don't know
whether uncle had even heard of the Reardons' misfortunes. I suppose he
must have done. My cousin John was at the funeral, but not my aunt. I
think it most likely father and John didn't speak a word to each other.
Fortunately the relatives were lost sight of in the great crowd of
Wattleborough people; there was an enormous procession, of course.'

Maud kept glancing at her sister. The ill-humour had not altogether
passed from her face, but it was now blended with reflectiveness.

A few moments more, and Marian had to hasten home. When she was gone the
sisters looked at each other.

'Five thousand pounds,' murmured the elder. 'I suppose that is
considered nothing.'

'I suppose so.--He was here when Marian came, but didn't stay.'

'Then you'll take him the news this evening?'

'Yes,' replied Dora. Then, after musing, 'He seemed annoyed that you
were at the Lanes' again.'

Maud made a movement of indifference.

'What has been putting you out?'

'Things were rather stupid. Some people who were to have come didn't
turn up. And--well, it doesn't matter.'

She rose and glanced at herself in the little oblong mirror over the
mantelpiece.

'Did Jasper ever speak to you of a Miss Rupert?' asked Dora.

'Not that I remember.'

'What do you think? He told me in the calmest way that he didn't see
why Marian should think of him as anything but the most ordinary
friend--said he had never given her reason to think anything else.'

'Indeed! And Miss Rupert is someone who has the honour of his
preference?'

'He says she is about thirty, and rather masculine, but a great heiress.
Jasper is shameful!'

'What do you expect? I consider it is your duty to let Marian know
everything he says. Otherwise you help to deceive her. He has no sense
of honour in such things.'

Dora was so impatient to let her brother have the news that she left
the house as soon as she had had tea on the chance of finding Jasper
at home. She had not gone a dozen yards before she encountered him in
person.

'I was afraid Marian might still be with you,' he said, laughing.

'I should have asked the landlady. Well?'

'We can't stand talking here. You had better come in.'

He was in too much excitement to wait.

'Just tell me. What has she?'

Dora walked quickly towards the house, looking annoyed.

'Nothing at all? Then what has her father?'

'He has nothing,' replied his sister, 'and she has five thousand
pounds.'

Jasper walked on with bent head. He said nothing more until he was
upstairs in the sitting-room, where Maud greeted him carelessly.

'Mrs Reardon anything?'

Dora informed him.

'What?' he cried incredulously. 'Ten thousand? You don't say so!'

He burst into uproarious laughter.

'So Reardon is rescued from the slum and the clerk's desk! Well, I'm
glad; by Jove, I am. I should have liked it better if Marian had had the
ten thousand and he the five, but it's an excellent joke. Perhaps the
next thing will be that he'll refuse to have anything to do with his
wife's money; that would be just like him.' After amusing himself with
this subject for a few minutes more, he turned to the window and stood
there in silence.

'Are you going to have tea with us?' Dora inquired.

He did not seem to hear her. On a repetition of the inquiry, he answered
absently:

'Yes, I may as well. Then I can go home and get to work.'

During the remainder of his stay he talked very little, and as Maud also
was in an abstracted mood, tea passed almost in silence. On the point of
departing he asked:

'When is Marian likely to come here again?'

'I haven't the least idea,' answered Dora.

He nodded, and went his way.

It was necessary for him to work at a magazine article which he had
begun this morning, and on reaching home he spread out his papers in
the usual businesslike fashion. The subject out of which he was
manufacturing 'copy' had its difficulties, and was not altogether
congenial to him; this morning he had laboured with unwonted effort to
produce about a page of manuscript, and now that he tried to resume the
task his thoughts would not centre upon it. Jasper was too young to have
thoroughly mastered the art of somnambulistic composition; to write,
he was still obliged to give exclusive attention to the matter under
treatment. Dr Johnson's saying, that a man may write at any time if he
will set himself doggedly to it, was often upon his lips, and had even
been of help to him, as no doubt it has to many another man obliged to
compose amid distracting circumstances; but the formula had no efficacy
this evening. Twice or thrice he rose from his chair, paced the room
with a determined brow, and sat down again with vigorous clutch of the
pen; still he failed to excogitate a single sentence that would serve
his purpose.

'I must have it out with myself before I can do anything,' was his
thought as he finally abandoned the endeavour. 'I must make up my mind.'

To this end he settled himself in an easy-chair and began to smoke
cigarettes. Some dozen of these aids to reflection only made him so
nervous that he could no longer remain alone. He put on his hat and
overcoat and went out--to find that it was raining heavily. He returned
for an umbrella, and before long was walking aimlessly about the Strand,
unable to make up his mind whether to turn into a theatre or not.
Instead of doing so, he sought a certain upper room of a familiar
restaurant, where the day's papers were to be seen, and perchance an
acquaintance might be met. Only half-a-dozen men were there, reading and
smoking, and all were unknown to him. He drank a glass of lager beer,
skimmed the news of the evening, and again went out into the bad
weather.

After all it was better to go home. Everything he encountered had an
unsettling effect upon him, so that he was further than ever from the
decision at which he wished to arrive. In Mornington Road he came upon
Whelpdale, who was walking slowly under an umbrella.

'I've just called at your place.'

'All right; come back if you like.'

'But perhaps I shall waste your time?' said Whelpdale, with unusual
diffidence.

Reassured, he gladly returned to the house. Milvain acquainted him
with the fact of John Yule's death, and with its result so far as it
concerned the Reardons. They talked of how the couple would probably
behave under this decisive change of circumstances.

'Biffen professes to know nothing about Mrs Reardon,' said Whelpdale. 'I
suspect he keeps his knowledge to himself, out of regard for Reardon. It
wouldn't surprise me if they live apart for a long time yet.'

'Not very likely. It was only want of money.'

'They're not at all suited to each other. Mrs Reardon, no doubt, repents
her marriage bitterly, and I doubt whether Reardon cares much for his
wife.'

'As there's no way of getting divorced they'll make the best of it. Ten
thousand pounds produce about four hundred a year; it's enough to live
on.'

'And be miserable on--if they no longer love each other.'

'You're such a sentimental fellow!' cried Jasper. 'I believe you
seriously think that love--the sort of frenzy you understand by
it--ought to endure throughout married life. How has a man come to your
age with such primitive ideas?'

'Well, I don't know. Perhaps you err a little in the opposite
direction.'

'I haven't much faith in marrying for love, as you know. What's more,
I believe it's the very rarest thing for people to be in love with each
other. Reardon and his wife perhaps were an instance; perhaps--I'm
not quite sure about her. As a rule, marriage is the result of a mild
preference, encouraged by circumstances, and deliberately heightened
into strong sexual feeling. You, of all men, know well enough that the
same kind of feeling could be produced for almost any woman who wasn't
repulsive.'

'The same kind of feeling; but there's vast difference of degree.'

'To be sure. I think it's only a matter of degree. When it rises to the
point of frenzy people may strictly be said to be in love; and, as I
tell you, I think that comes to pass very rarely indeed. For my own
part, I have no experience of it, and think I never shall have.'

'I can't say the same.'

They laughed.

'I dare say you have imagined yourself in love--or really been so for
aught I know--a dozen times. How the deuce you can attach any importance
to such feeling where marriage is concerned I don't understand.'

'Well, now,' said Whelpdale, 'I have never upheld the theory--at least
not since I was sixteen--that a man can be in love only once, or that
there is one particular woman if he misses whom he can never be happy.
There may be thousands of women whom I could love with equal sincerity.'

'I object to the word "love" altogether. It has been vulgarised. Let us
talk about compatibility. Now, I should say that, no doubt, and speaking
scientifically, there is one particular woman supremely fitted to
each man. I put aside consideration of circumstances; we know that
circumstances will disturb any degree of abstract fitness. But in the
nature of things there must be one woman whose nature is specially well
adapted to harmonise with mine, or with yours. If there were any means
of discovering this woman in each case, then I have no doubt it would
be worth a man's utmost effort to do so, and any amount of erotic
jubilation would be reasonable when the discovery was made. But
the thing is impossible, and, what's more, we know what ridiculous
fallibility people display when they imagine they have found the best
substitute for that indiscoverable. This is what makes me impatient with
sentimental talk about marriage. An educated man mustn't play so into
the hands of ironic destiny. Let him think he wants to marry a woman;
but don't let him exaggerate his feelings or idealise their nature.'

'There's a good deal in all that,' admitted Whelpdale, though
discontentedly.

'There's more than a good deal; there's the last word on the subject.
The days of romantic love are gone by. The scientific spirit has put
an end to that kind of self-deception. Romantic love was inextricably
blended with all sorts of superstitions--belief in personal immortality,
in superior beings, in--all the rest of it. What we think of now is
moral and intellectual and physical compatibility; I mean, if we are
reasonable people.'

'And if we are not so unfortunate as to fall in love with an
incompatible,' added Whelpdale, laughing.

'Well, that is a form of unreason--a blind desire which science could
explain in each case. I rejoice that I am not subject to that form of
epilepsy.'

'You positively never were in love!'

'As you understand it, never. But I have felt a very distinct
preference.'

'Based on what you think compatibility?'

'Yes. Not strong enough to make me lose sight of prudence and advantage.
No, not strong enough for that.'

He seemed to be reassuring himself.

'Then of course that can't be called love,' said Whelpdale.

'Perhaps not. But, as I told you, a preference of this kind can be
heightened into emotion, if one chooses. In the case of which I am
thinking it easily might be. And I think it very improbable indeed that
I should repent it if anything led me to indulge such an impulse.'

Whelpdale smiled.

'This is very interesting. I hope it may lead to something.'

'I don't think it will. I am far more likely to marry some woman for
whom I have no preference, but who can serve me materially.'

'I confess that amazes me. I know the value of money as well as you do,
but I wouldn't marry a rich woman for whom I had no preference. By Jove,
no!'

'Yes, yes. You are a consistent sentimentalist.'

'Doomed to perpetual disappointment,' said the other, looking
disconsolately about the room.

'Courage, my boy! I have every hope that I shall see you marry and
repent.'

'I admit the danger of that. But shall I tell you something I have
observed? Each woman I fall in love with is of a higher type than the
one before.'

Jasper roared irreverently, and his companion looked hurt.

'But I am perfectly serious, I assure you. To go back only three or four
years. There was the daughter of my landlady in Barham Street; well, a
nice girl enough, but limited, decidedly limited.

Next came that girl at the stationer's--you remember? She was distinctly
an advance, both in mind and person. Then there was Miss Embleton; yes,
I think she made again an advance. She had been at Bedford College,
you know, and was really a girl of considerable attainments; morally,
admirable. Afterwards--'

He paused.

'The maiden from Birmingham, wasn't it?' said Jasper, again exploding.

'Yes, it was. Well, I can't be quite sure. But in many respects that
girl was my ideal; she really was.'

'As you once or twice told me at the time.'

'I really believe she would rank above Miss Embleton--at all events from
my point of view. And that's everything, you know. It's the effect a
woman produces on one that has to be considered.'

'The next should be a paragon,' said Jasper.

'The next?'

Whelpdale again looked about the room, but added nothing, and fell into
a long silence.

When left to himself Jasper walked about a little, then sat down at his
writing-table, for he felt easier in mind, and fancied that he might
still do a couple of hours' work before going to bed. He did in fact
write half-a-dozen lines, but with the effort came back his former mood.
Very soon the pen dropped, and he was once more in the throes of anxious
mental debate.

He sat till after midnight, and when he went to his bedroom it was with
a lingering step, which proved him still a prey to indecision.




PART FOUR



CHAPTER XXIII. A PROPOSED INVESTMENT

Alfred Yule's behaviour under his disappointment seemed to prove that
even for him the uses of adversity could be sweet. On the day after his
return home he displayed a most unwonted mildness in such remarks as
he addressed to his wife, and his bearing towards Marian was gravely
gentle. At meals he conversed, or rather monologised, on literary
topics, with occasionally one of his grim jokes, pointed for Marian's
appreciation. He became aware that the girl had been overtaxing her
strength of late, and suggested a few weeks of recreation among new
novels. The coldness and gloom which had possessed him when he made a
formal announcement of the news appeared to have given way before the
sympathy manifested by his wife and daughter; he was now sorrowful, but
resigned.

He explained to Marian the exact nature of her legacy. It was to be paid
out of her uncle's share in a wholesale stationery business, with which
John Yule had been connected for the last twenty years, but from which
he had not long ago withdrawn a large portion of his invested capital.
This house was known as 'Turberville & Co.,' a name which Marian now
heard for the first time.

'I knew nothing of his association with them,' said her father. 'They
tell me that seven or eight thousand pounds will be realised from that
source; it seems a pity that the investment was not left to you intact.
Whether there will be any delay in withdrawing the money I can't say.'

The executors were two old friends of the deceased, one of them a former
partner in his paper-making concern.

On the evening of the second day, about an hour after dinner was over,
Mr Hinks called at the house; as usual, he went into the study. Before
long came a second visitor, Mr Quarmby, who joined Yule and Hinks. The
three had all sat together for some time, when Marian, who happened to
be coming down stairs, saw her father at the study door.

'Ask your mother to let us have some supper at a quarter to ten,' he
said urbanely. 'And come in, won't you? We are only gossiping.'

It had not often happened that Marian was invited to join parties of
this kind.

'Do you wish me to come?' she asked.

'Yes, I should like you to, if you have nothing particular to do.'

Marian informed Mrs Yule that the visitors would have supper, and then
went to the study. Mr Quarmby was smoking a pipe; Mr Hinks, who on
grounds of economy had long since given up tobacco, sat with his hands
in his trouser pockets, and his long, thin legs tucked beneath the
chair; both rose and greeted Marian with more than ordinary warmth.

'Will you allow me five or six more puffs?' asked Mr Quarmby, laying one
hand on his ample stomach and elevating his pipe as if it were a glass
of beaded liquor. 'I shall then have done.'

'As many more as you like,' Marian replied.

The easiest chair was placed for her, Mr Hinks hastening to perform this
courtesy, and her father apprised her of the topic they were discussing.

'What's your view, Marian? Is there anything to be said for the
establishment of a literary academy in England?'

Mr Quarmby beamed benevolently upon her, and Mr Hinks, his scraggy neck
at full length, awaited her reply with a look of the most respectful
attention.

'I really think we have quite enough literary quarrelling as it is,' the
girl replied, casting down her eyes and smiling.

Mr Quarmby uttered a hollow chuckle, Mr Hinks laughed thinly and
exclaimed, 'Very good indeed! Very good!' Yule affected to applaud with
impartial smile.

'It wouldn't harmonise with the Anglo-Saxon spirit,' remarked Mr Hinks,
with an air of diffident profundity.

Yule held forth on the subject for a few minutes in laboured phrases.
Presently the conversation turned to periodicals, and the three men were
unanimous in an opinion that no existing monthly or quarterly could be
considered as representing the best literary opinion.

'We want,' remarked Mr Quarmby, 'we want a monthly review which
shall deal exclusively with literature. The Fortnightly, the
Contemporary--they are very well in their way, but then they are mere
miscellanies. You will find one solid literary article amid a confused
mass of politics and economics and general clap-trap.'

'Articles on the currency and railway statistics and views of
evolution,' said Mr Hinks, with a look as if something were grating
between his teeth.

'The quarterlies?' put in Yule. 'Well, the original idea of the
quarterlies was that there are not enough important books published to
occupy solid reviewers more than four times a year. That may be true,
but then a literary monthly would include much more than professed
reviews. Hinks's essays on the historical drama would have come out in
it very well; or your "Spanish Poets," Quarmby.'

'I threw out the idea to Jedwood the other day,' said Mr Quarmby, 'and
he seemed to nibble at it.'

'Yes, yes,' came from Yule; 'but Jedwood has so many irons in the fire.
I doubt if he has the necessary capital at command just now. No doubt
he's the man, if some capitalist would join him.'

'No enormous capital needed,' opined Mr Quarmby. 'The thing would
pay its way almost from the first. It would take a place between the
literary weeklies and the quarterlies. The former are too academic,
the latter too massive, for multitudes of people who yet have strong
literary tastes. Foreign publications should be liberally dealt with.
But, as Hinks says, no meddling with the books that are no books--biblia
abiblia; nothing about essays on bimetallism and treatises for or
against vaccination.'

Even here, in the freedom of a friend's study, he laughed his
Reading-room laugh, folding both hands upon his expansive waistcoat.

'Fiction? I presume a serial of the better kind might be admitted?' said
Yule.

'That would be advisable, no doubt. But strictly of the better kind.'

'Oh, strictly of the better kind,' chimed in Mr Hinks.

They pursued the discussion as if they were an editorial committee
planning a review of which the first number was shortly to appear.
It occupied them until Mrs Yule announced at the door that supper was
ready.

During the meal Marian found herself the object of unusual attention;
her father troubled to inquire if the cut of cold beef he sent her was
to her taste, and kept an eye on her progress. Mr Hinks talked to her in
a tone of respectful sympathy, and Mr Quarmby was paternally jovial when
he addressed her. Mrs Yule would have kept silence, in her ordinary way,
but this evening her husband made several remarks which he had adapted
to her intellect, and even showed that a reply would be graciously
received.

Mother and daughter remained together when the men withdrew to their
tobacco and toddy. Neither made allusion to the wonderful change, but
they talked more light-heartedly than for a long time.

On the morrow Yule began by consulting Marian with regard to the
disposition of matter in an essay he was writing. What she said he
weighed carefully, and seemed to think that she had set his doubts at
rest.

'Poor old Hinks!' he said presently, with a sigh. 'Breaking up, isn't
he? He positively totters in his walk. I'm afraid he's the kind of
man to have a paralytic stroke; it wouldn't astonish me to hear at any
moment that he was lying helpless.'

'What ever would become of him in that case?'

'Goodness knows! One might ask the same of so many of us. What would
become of me, for instance, if I were incapable of work?'

Marian could make no reply.

'There's something I'll just mention to you,' he went on in a lowered
tone, 'though I don't wish you to take it too seriously. I'm beginning
to have a little trouble with my eyes.'

She looked at him, startled.

'With your eyes?'

'Nothing, I hope; but--well, I think I shall see an oculist. One doesn't
care to face a prospect of failing sight, perhaps of cataract, or
something of that kind; still, it's better to know the facts, I should
say.'

'By all means go to an oculist,' said Marian, earnestly.

'Don't disturb yourself about it. It may be nothing at all. But in any
case I must change my glasses.'

He rustled over some slips of manuscript, whilst Marian regarded him
anxiously.

'Now, I appeal to you, Marian,' he continued: 'could I possibly save
money out of an income that has never exceeded two hundred and fifty
pounds, and often--I mean even in latter years--has been much less?'

'I don't see how you could.'

'In one way, of course, I have managed it. My life is insured for five
hundred pounds. But that is no provision for possible disablement. If I
could no longer earn money with my pen, what would become of me?'

Marian could have made an encouraging reply, but did not venture to
utter her thoughts.

'Sit down,' said her father. 'You are not to work for a few days, and I
myself shall be none the worse for a morning's rest. Poor old Hinks!
I suppose we shall help him among us, somehow. Quarmby, of course, is
comparatively flourishing. Well, we have been companions for a quarter
of a century, we three. When I first met Quarmby I was a Grub Street
gazetteer, and I think he was even poorer than I. A life of toil! A life
of toil!'

'That it has been, indeed.'

'By-the-bye'--he threw an arm over the back of his chair--'what did
you think of our imaginary review, the thing we were talking about last
night?'

'There are so many periodicals,' replied Marian, doubtfully.

'So many? My dear child, if we live another ten years we shall see the
number trebled.'

'Is it desirable?'

'That there should be such growth of periodicals? Well, from one point
of view, no. No doubt they take up the time which some people would
give to solid literature. But, on the other hand, there's a far greater
number of people who would probably not read at all, but for the
temptations of these short and new articles; and they may be induced to
pass on to substantial works. Of course it all depends on the quality of
the periodical matter you offer. Now, magazines like'--he named two or
three of popular stamp--'might very well be dispensed with, unless one
regards them as an alternative to the talking of scandal or any other
vicious result of total idleness. But such a monthly as we projected
would be of distinct literary value. There can be no doubt that someone
or other will shortly establish it.'

'I am afraid,' said Marian, 'I haven't so much sympathy with literary
undertakings as you would like me to have.'

Money is a great fortifier of self-respect. Since she had become really
conscious of her position as the owner of five thousand pounds, Marian
spoke with a steadier voice, walked with firmer step; mentally she felt
herself altogether a less dependent being. She might have confessed this
lukewarmness towards literary enterprise in the anger which her father
excited eight or nine days ago, but at that time she could not have
uttered her opinion calmly, deliberately, as now. The smile which
accompanied the words was also new; it signified deliverance from
pupilage.

'I have felt that,' returned her father, after a slight pause to command
his voice, that it might be suave instead of scornful. 'I greatly fear
that I have made your life something of a martyrdom----'

'Don't think I meant that, father. I am speaking only of the general
question. I can't be quite so zealous as you are, that's all. I love
books, but I could wish people were content for a while with those we
already have.'

'My dear Marian, don't suppose that I am out of sympathy with you here.
Alas! how much of my work has been mere drudgery, mere labouring for a
livelihood! How gladly I would have spent much more of my time among
the great authors, with no thought of making money of them! If I speak
approvingly of a scheme for a new periodical, it is greatly because of
my necessities.'

He paused and looked at her. Marian returned the look.

'You would of course write for it,' she said.

'Marian, why shouldn't I edit it? Why shouldn't it be your property?'

'My property--?'

She checked a laugh. There came into her mind a more disagreeable
suspicion than she had ever entertained of her father. Was this
the meaning of his softened behaviour? Was he capable of calculated
hypocrisy? That did not seem consistent with his character, as she knew
it.

'Let us talk it over,' said Yule. He was in visible agitation and his
voice shook. 'The idea may well startle you at first. It will seem to
you that I propose to make away with your property before you have even
come into possession of it.' He laughed. 'But, in fact, what I have in
mind is merely an investment for your capital, and that an admirable
one. Five thousand pounds at three per cent.--one doesn't care to reckon
on more--represents a hundred and fifty a year. Now, there can be very
little doubt that, if it were invested in literary property such as I
have in mind, it would bring you five times that interest, and before
long perhaps much more. Of course I am now speaking in the roughest
outline. I should have to get trustworthy advice; complete and detailed
estimates would be submitted to you. At present I merely suggest to you
this form of investment.'

He watched her face eagerly, greedily. When Marian's eyes rose to his he
looked away.

'Then, of course,' she said, 'you don't expect me to give any decided
answer.'

'Of course not--of course not. I merely put before you the chief
advantages of such an investment. As I am a selfish old fellow, I'll
talk about the benefit to myself first of all. I should be editor of the
new review; I should draw a stipend sufficient to all my needs--quite
content, at first, to take far less than another man would ask, and to
progress with the advance of the periodical. This position would enable
me to have done with mere drudgery; I should only write when I felt
called to do so--when the spirit moved me.' Again he laughed, as though
desirous of keeping his listener in good humour. 'My eyes would be
greatly spared henceforth.'

He dwelt on that point, waiting its effect on Marian. As she said
nothing he proceeded:

'And suppose I really were doomed to lose my sight in the course of a
few years, am I wrong in thinking that the proprietor of this periodical
would willingly grant a small annuity to the man who had firmly
established it?'

'I see the force of all that,' said Marian; 'but it takes for granted
that the periodical will be successful.'

'It does. In the hands of a publisher like Jedwood--a vigorous man of
the new school--its success could scarcely be doubtful.'

'Do you think five thousand pounds would be enough to start such a
review?'

'Well, I can say nothing definite on that point. For one thing, the
coat must be made according to the cloth; expenditure can be largely
controlled without endangering success. Then again, I think Jedwood
would take a share in the venture. These are details. At present I only
want to familiarise you with the thought that an investment of this sort
will very probably offer itself to you.'

'It would be better if we called it a speculation,' said Marian, smiling
uneasily.

Her one object at present was to oblige her father to understand that
the suggestion by no means lured her. She could not tell him that what
he proposed was out of the question, though as yet that was the light in
which she saw it. His subtlety of approach had made her feel justified
in dealing with him in a matter-of-fact way. He must see that she was
not to be cajoled. Obviously, and in the nature of the case, he was
urging a proposal in which he himself had all faith; but Marian knew
his judgment was far from infallible. It mitigated her sense of behaving
unkindly to reflect that in all likelihood this disposal of her money
would be the worst possible for her own interests, and therefore for
his. If, indeed, his dark forebodings were warranted, then upon her
would fall the care of him, and the steadiness with which she faced that
responsibility came from a hope of which she could not speak.

'Name it as you will,' returned her father, hardly suppressing a note of
irritation. 'True, every commercial enterprise is a speculation. But let
me ask you one question, and beg you to reply frankly. Do you distrust
my ability to conduct this periodical?'

She did. She knew that he was not in touch with the interests of the
day, and that all manner of considerations akin to the prime end of
selling his review would make him an untrustworthy editor.

But how could she tell him this?

'My opinion would be worthless,' she replied.

'If Jedwood were disposed to put confidence in me, you also would?'

'There's no need to talk of that now, father. Indeed, I can't say
anything that would sound like a promise.'

He flashed a glance at her. Then she was more than doubtful?

'But you have no objection, Marian, to talk in a friendly way of a
project that would mean so much to me?'

'But I am afraid to encourage you,' she replied, frankly. 'It is
impossible for me to say whether I can do as you wish, or not.'

'Yes, yes; I perfectly understand that. Heaven forbid that I should
regard you as a child to be led independently of your own views and
wishes! With so large a sum of money at stake, it would be monstrous
if I acted rashly, and tried to persuade you to do the same. The matter
will have to be most gravely considered.'

'Yes.' She spoke mechanically.

'But if only it should come to something! You don't know what it would
mean to me, Marian.'

'Yes, father; I know very well how you think and feel about it.'

'Do you?' He leaned forward, his features working under stress of
emotion. 'If I could see myself the editor of an influential review, all
my bygone toils and sufferings would be as nothing; I should rejoice in
them as the steps to this triumph. Meminisse juvabit! My dear, I am not
a man fitted for subordinate places. My nature is framed for authority.
The failure of all my undertakings rankles so in my heart that sometimes
I feel capable of every brutality, every meanness, every hateful
cruelty. To you I have behaved shamefully. Don't interrupt me, Marian.
I have treated you abominably, my child, my dear daughter--and all the
time with a full sense of what I was doing. That's the punishment of
faults such as mine. I hate myself for every harsh word and angry look I
have given you; at the time, I hated myself!'

'Father--'

'No, no; let me speak, Marian. You have forgiven me; I know it. You were
always ready to forgive, dear. Can I ever forget that evening when I
spoke like a brute, and you came afterwards and addressed me as if the
wrong had been on your side? It burns in my memory. It wasn't I who
spoke; it was the demon of failure, of humiliation. My enemies sit
in triumph, and scorn at me; the thought of it is infuriating. Have I
deserved this? Am I the inferior of--of those men who have succeeded
and now try to trample on me? No! I am not! I have a better brain and a
better heart!'

Listening to this strange outpouring, Marian more than forgave the
hypocrisy of the last day or two. Nay, could it be called hypocrisy? It
was only his better self declared at the impulse of a passionate hope.

'Why should you think so much of these troubles, father? Is it such a
great matter that narrow-minded people triumph over you?'

'Narrow-minded?' He clutched at the word. 'You admit they are that?'

'I feel very sure that Mr Fadge is.'

'Then you are not on his side against me?'

'How could you suppose such a thing?'

'Well, well; we won't talk of that. Perhaps it isn't a great matter.
No--from a philosophical point of view, such things are unspeakably
petty. But I am not much of a philosopher.' He laughed, with a break in
his voice. 'Defeat in life is defeat, after all; and unmerited failure
is a bitter curse. You see, I am not too old to do something yet. My
sight is failing, but I can take care of it. If I had my own review, I
would write every now and then a critical paper in my very best style.
You remember poor old Hinks's note about me in his book? We laughed at
it, but he wasn't so far wrong. I have many of those qualities. A man is
conscious of his own merits as well as of his defects. I have done a few
admirable things. You remember my paper on Lord Herbert of Cherbury? No
one ever wrote a more subtle piece of criticism; but it was swept aside
among the rubbish of the magazines. And it's just because of my pungent
phrases that I have excited so much enmity. Wait! Wait! Let me have my
own review, and leisure, and satisfaction of mind--heavens! what I will
write! How I will scarify!'

'That is unworthy of you. How much better to ignore your enemies!

In such a position, I should carefully avoid every word that betrayed
personal feeling.'

'Well, well; you are of course right, my good girl. And I believe I
should do injustice to myself if I made you think that those ignoble
motives are the strongest in me. No; it isn't so. From my boyhood I
have had a passionate desire of literary fame, deep down below all the
surface faults of my character. The best of my life has gone by, and it
drives me to despair when I feel that I have not gained the position due
to me. There is only one way of doing this now, and that is by becoming
the editor of an important periodical. Only in that way shall I succeed
in forcing people to pay attention to my claims. Many a man goes to
his grave unrecognised, just because he has never had a fair judgment.
Nowadays it is the unscrupulous men of business who hold the attention
of the public; they blow their trumpets so loudly that the voices of
honest men have no chance of being heard.'

Marian was pained by the humility of his pleading with her--for what was
all this but an endeavour to move her sympathies?--and by the necessity
she was under of seeming to turn a deaf ear. She believed that there
was some truth in his estimate of his own powers; though as an editor
he would almost certainly fail, as a man of letters he had probably
done far better work than some who had passed him by on their way to
popularity. Circumstances might enable her to assist him, though not in
the way he proposed. The worst of it was that she could not let him see
what was in her mind. He must think that she was simply balancing
her own satisfaction against his, when in truth she suffered from the
conviction that to yield would be as unwise in regard to her father's
future as it would be perilous to her own prospect of happiness.

'Shall we leave this to be talked of when the money has been paid over
to me?' she said, after a silence.

'Yes. Don't suppose I wish to influence you by dwelling on my
own hardships. That would be contemptible. I have only taken this
opportunity of making myself better known to you. I don't readily talk
of myself and in general my real feelings are hidden by the faults of
my temper. In suggesting how you could do me a great service, and at the
same time reap advantage for yourself I couldn't but remember how little
reason you have to think kindly of me. But we will postpone further
talk. You will think over what I have said?'

Marian promised that she would, and was glad to bring the conversation
to an end.

When Sunday came, Yule inquired of his daughter if she had any
engagement for the afternoon.

'Yes, I have,' she replied, with an effort to disguise her
embarrassment.

'I'm sorry. I thought of asking you to come with me to Quarmby's. Shall
you be away through the evening?'

'Till about nine o'clock, I think.'

'Ah! Never mind, never mind.'

He tried to dismiss the matter as if it were of no moment, but Marian
saw the shadow that passed over his countenance. This was just after
breakfast. For the remainder of the morning she did not meet him, and at
the mid-day dinner he was silent, though he brought no book to the table
with him, as he was wont to do when in his dark moods. Marian
talked with her mother, doing her best to preserve the appearance of
cheerfulness which was natural since the change in Yule's demeanour.

She chanced to meet her father in the passage just as she was going
out. He smiled (it was more like a grin of pain) and nodded, but said
nothing.

When the front door closed, he went into the parlour. Mrs Yule was
reading, or, at all events, turning over a volume of an illustrated
magazine.

'Where do you suppose she has gone?' he asked, in a voice which was only
distant, not offensive.

'To the Miss Milvains, I believe,' Mrs Yule answered, looking aside.

'Did she tell you so?'

