two people who have misunderstood each other. Go to Westbourne Park
to-morrow. And be reasonable; be more than reasonable. The happiness
of your life depends on what you do now. Be content to forget whatever
wrong has been done you. To think that a man should need persuading to
win back such a wife!'

In truth, there needed little persuasion. Perverseness, one of the forms
or issues of self-pity, made him strive against his desire, and caused
him to adopt a tone of acerbity in excess of what he felt; but already
he had made up his mind to see Amy. Even if this excuse had not
presented itself he must very soon have yielded to the longing for
a sight of his wife's face which day by day increased among all the
conflicting passions of which he was the victim. A month or two ago,
when the summer sunshine made his confinement to the streets a daily
torture, he convinced himself that there remained in him no trace of his
love for Amy; there were moments when he thought of her with repugnance,
as a cold, selfish woman, who had feigned affection when it seemed her
interest to do so, but brutally declared her true self when there was
no longer anything to be hoped from him. That was the self-deception of
misery. Love, even passion, was still alive in the depths of his being;
the animation with which he sped to his friend as soon as a new hope had
risen was the best proof of his feeling.

He went home and wrote to Amy.

'I have a reason for wishing to see you. Will you have the kindness to
appoint an hour on Sunday morning when I can speak with you in private?
It must be understood that I shall see no one else.'

She would receive this by the first post to-morrow, Saturday, and
doubtless would let him hear in reply some time in the afternoon.
Impatience allowed him little sleep, and the next day was a long
weariness of waiting. The evening he would have to spend at the
hospital; if there came no reply before the time of his leaving home, he
knew not how he should compel himself to the ordinary routine of work.
Yet the hour came, and he had heard nothing. He was tempted to go at
once to Westbourne Park, but reason prevailed with him. When he again
entered the house, having walked at his utmost speed from the City Road,
the letter lay waiting for him; it had been pushed beneath his door, and
when he struck a match he found that one of his feet was upon the white
envelope.

Amy wrote that she would be at home at eleven to-morrow morning. Not
another word.

In all probability she knew of the offer that had been made to him; Mrs
Carter would have told her. Was it of good or of ill omen that she wrote
only these half-dozen words? Half through the night he plagued himself
with suppositions, now thinking that her brevity promised a welcome,
now that she wished to warn him against expecting anything but a cold,
offended demeanour. At seven he was dressed; two hours and a half had
to be killed before he could start on his walk westward. He would have
wandered about the streets, but it rained.

He had made himself as decent as possible in appearance, but he must
necessarily seem an odd Sunday visitor at a house such as Mrs Yule's.
His soft felt hat, never brushed for months, was a greyish green, and
stained round the band with perspiration. His necktie was discoloured
and worn. Coat and waistcoat might pass muster, but of the trousers the
less said the better. One of his boots was patched, and both were all
but heelless.

Very well; let her see him thus. Let her understand what it meant to
live on twelve and sixpence a week.

Though it was cold and wet he could not put on his overcoat. Three
years ago it had been a fairly good ulster; at present, the edges of the
sleeves were frayed, two buttons were missing, and the original hue of
the cloth was indeterminable.

At half-past nine he set out and struggled with his shabby umbrella
against wind and rain. Down Pentonville Hill, up Euston Road, all
along Marylebone Road, then north-westwards towards the point of his
destination. It was a good six miles from the one house to the other,
but he arrived before the appointed time, and had to stray about until
the cessation of bell-clanging and the striking of clocks told him it
was eleven. Then he presented himself at the familiar door.

On his asking for Mrs Reardon, he was at once admitted and led up to the
drawing-room; the servant did not ask his name.

Then he waited for a minute or two, feeling himself a squalid wretch
amid the dainty furniture. The door opened. Amy, in a simple but very
becoming dress, approached to within a yard of him; after the first
glance she had averted her eyes, and she did not offer to shake hands.
He saw that his muddy and shapeless boots drew her attention.

'Do you know why I have come?' he asked.

He meant the tone to be conciliatory, but he could not command his
voice, and it sounded rough, hostile.

'I think so,' Amy answered, seating herself gracefully. She would have
spoken with less dignity but for that accent of his.

'The Carters have told you?'

'Yes; I have heard about it.'

There was no promise in her manner. She kept her face turned away, and
Reardon saw its beautiful profile, hard and cold as though in marble.

'It doesn't interest you at all?'

'I am glad to hear that a better prospect offers for you.'

He did not sit down, and was holding his rusty hat behind his back.

'You speak as if it in no way concerned yourself. Is that what you wish
me to understand?'

'Won't it be better if you tell me why you have come here? As you are
resolved to find offence in whatever I say, I prefer to keep silence.
Please to let me know why you have asked to see me.'

Reardon turned abruptly as if to leave her, but checked himself at a
little distance.

Both had come to this meeting prepared for a renewal of amity, but in
these first few moments each was so disagreeably impressed by the look
and language of the other that a revulsion of feeling undid all the more
hopeful effects of their long severance. On entering, Amy had meant to
offer her hand, but the unexpected meanness of Reardon's aspect shocked
and restrained her. All but every woman would have experienced that
shrinking from the livery of poverty. Amy had but to reflect, and she
understood that her husband could in no wise help this shabbiness;
when he parted from her his wardrobe was already in a long-suffering
condition, and how was he to have purchased new garments since then?
None the less such attire degraded him in her eyes; it symbolised the
melancholy decline which he had suffered intellectually. On Reardon his
wife's elegance had the same repellent effect, though this would not
have been the case but for the expression of her countenance. Had it
been possible for them to remain together during the first five minutes
without exchange of words, sympathies might have prevailed on both
sides; the first speech uttered would most likely have harmonised with
their gentler thoughts. But the mischief was done so speedily.

A man must indeed be graciously endowed if his personal appearance can
defy the disadvantage of cheap modern clothing worn into shapelessness.
Reardon had no such remarkable physique, and it was not wonderful that
his wife felt ashamed of him. Strictly ashamed; he seemed to her a
social inferior; the impression was so strong that it resisted all
memory of his spiritual qualities. She might have anticipated this state
of things, and have armed herself to encounter it, but somehow she had
not done so. For more than five months she had been living among people
who dressed well; the contrast was too suddenly forced upon her. She was
especially susceptible in such matters, and had become none the less
so under the demoralising influence of her misfortunes. True, she soon
began to feel ashamed of her shame, but that could not annihilate the
natural feeling and its results.

'I don't love him. I can't love him.' Thus she spoke to herself, with
immutable decision. She had been doubtful till now, but all doubt was at
an end. Had Reardon been practical man enough to procure by hook or
by crook a decent suit of clothes for this interview, that ridiculous
trifle might have made all the difference in what was to result.

He turned again, and spoke with the harshness of a man who feels that he
is despised, and is determined to show an equal contempt.

'I came to ask you what you propose to do in case I go to Croydon.'

'I have no proposal to make whatever.'

'That means, then, that you are content to go on living here?'

'If I have no choice, I must make myself content.'

'But you have a choice.'

'None has yet been offered me.'

'Then I offer it now,' said Reardon, speaking less aggressively. 'I
shall have a dwelling rent free, and a hundred and fifty pounds a
year--perhaps it would be more in keeping with my station if I say that
I shall have something less than three pounds a week. You can either
accept from me half this money, as up to now, or come and take your
place again as my wife. Please to decide what you will do.'

'I will let you know by letter in a few days.'

It seemed impossible to her to say she would return, yet a refusal to
do so involved nothing less than separation for the rest of their lives.
Postponement of decision was her only resource.

'I must know at once,' said Reardon.

'I can't answer at once.'

'If you don't, I shall understand you to mean that you refuse to come
to me. You know the circumstances; there is no reason why you should
consult with anyone else. You can answer me immediately if you will.'

'I don't wish to answer you immediately,' Amy replied, paling slightly.

'Then that decides it. When I leave you we are strangers to each other.'

Amy made a rapid study of his countenance. She had never entertained for
a moment the supposition that his wits were unsettled, but none the less
the constant recurrence of that idea in her mother's talk had subtly
influenced her against her husband. It had confirmed her in thinking
that his behaviour was inexcusable. And now it seemed to her that
anyone might be justified in holding him demented, so reckless was his
utterance.

It was difficult to know him as the man who had loved her so devotedly,
who was incapable of an unkind word or look.

'If that is what you prefer,' she said, 'there must be a formal
separation. I can't trust my future to your caprice.'

'You mean it must be put into the hands of a lawyer?'

'Yes, I do.'

'That will be the best, no doubt.'

'Very well; I will speak with my friends about it.'

'Your friends!' he exclaimed bitterly. 'But for those friends of yours,
this would never have happened. I wish you had been alone in the world
and penniless.'

'A kind wish, all things considered.'

'Yes, it is a kind wish. Then your marriage with me would have been
binding; you would have known that my lot was yours, and the knowledge
would have helped your weakness. I begin to see how much right there is
on the side of those people who would keep women in subjection. You have
been allowed to act with independence, and the result is that you have
ruined my life and debased your own. If I had been strong enough to
treat you as a child, and bid you follow me wherever my own fortunes
led, it would have been as much better for you as for me. I was weak,
and I suffer as all weak people do.'

'You think it was my duty to share such a home as you have at present?'

'You know it was. And if the choice had lain between that and earning
your own livelihood you would have thought that even such a poor home
might be made tolerable. There were possibilities in you of better
things than will ever come out now.'

There followed a silence. Amy sat with her eyes gloomily fixed on the
carpet; Reardon looked about the room, but saw nothing. He had thrown
his hat into a chair, and his fingers worked nervously together behind
his back.

'Will you tell me,' he said at length, 'how your position is regarded
by these friends of yours? I don't mean your mother and brother, but the
people who come to this house.'

'I have not asked such people for their opinion.'

'Still, I suppose some sort of explanation has been necessary in your
intercourse with them. How have you represented your relations with me?'

'I can't see that that concerns you.'

'In a manner it does. Certainly it matters very little to me how I am
thought of by people of this kind, but one doesn't like to be reviled
without cause. Have you allowed it to be supposed that I have made life
with me intolerable for you?'

'No, I have not. You insult me by asking the question, but as you
don't seem to understand feelings of that kind I may as well answer you
simply.'

'Then have you told them the truth? That I became so poor you couldn't
live with me?'

'I have never said that in so many words, but no doubt it is understood.
It must be known also that you refused to take the step which might have
helped you out of your difficulties.'

'What step?'

She reminded him of his intention to spend half a year in working at the
seaside.

'I had utterly forgotten it,' he returned with a mocking laugh. 'That
shows how ridiculous such a thing would have been.'

'You are doing no literary work at all?' Amy asked.

'Do you imagine that I have the peace of mind necessary for anything of
that sort?'

This was in a changed voice. It reminded her so strongly of her husband
before his disasters that she could not frame a reply.

'Do you think I am able to occupy myself with the affairs of imaginary
people?'

'I didn't necessarily mean fiction.'

'That I can forget myself, then, in the study of literature?--I wonder
whether you really think of me like that. How, in Heaven's name, do you
suppose I spend my leisure time?'

She made no answer.

'Do you think I take this calamity as light-heartedly as you do, Amy?'

'I am far from taking it light-heartedly.'

'Yet you are in good health. I see no sign that you have suffered.'

She kept silence. Her suffering had been slight enough, and chiefly due
to considerations of social propriety; but she would not avow this, and
did not like to make admission of it to herself. Before her friends she
frequently affected to conceal a profound sorrow; but so long as her
child was left to her she was in no danger of falling a victim to
sentimental troubles.

'And certainly I can't believe it,' he continued, 'now you declare your
wish to be formally separated from me.'

'I have declared no such wish.'

'Indeed you have. If you can hesitate a moment about returning to me
when difficulties are at an end, that tells me you would prefer final
separation.'

'I hesitate for this reason,' Amy said after reflecting. 'You are so
very greatly changed from what you used to be, that I think it doubtful
if I could live with you.'

'Changed?--Yes, that is true, I am afraid. But how do you think this
change will affect my behaviour to you?'

'Remember how you have been speaking to me.'

'And you think I should treat you brutally if you came into my power?'

'Not brutally, in the ordinary sense of the word. But with faults of
temper which I couldn't bear. I have my own faults. I can't behave as
meekly as some women can.'

It was a small concession, but Reardon made much of it.

'Did my faults of temper give you any trouble during the first year of
our married life?' he asked gently.

'No,' she admitted.

'They began to afflict you when I was so hard driven by difficulties
that I needed all your sympathy, all your forbearance. Did I receive
much of either from you, Amy?'

'I think you did--until you demanded impossible things of me.'

'It was always in your power to rule me. What pained me worst, and
hardened me against you, was that I saw you didn't care to exert your
influence. There was never a time when I could have resisted a word of
yours spoken out of your love for me. But even then, I am afraid, you no
longer loved me, and now--'

He broke off, and stood watching her face.

'Have you any love for me left?' burst from his lips, as if the words
all but choked him in the utterance.

Amy tried to shape some evasive answer, but could say nothing.

'Is there ever so small a hope that I might win some love from you
again?'

'If you wish me to come and live with you when you go to Croydon I will
do so.'

'But that is not answering me, Amy.'

'It's all I can say.'

'Then you mean that you would sacrifice yourself out of--what? Out of
pity for me, let us say.'

'Do you wish to see Willie?' asked Amy, instead of replying.

'No. It is you I have come to see. The child is nothing to me, compared
with you. It is you, who loved me, who became my wife--you only I care
about. Tell me you will try to be as you used to be. Give me only that
hope, Amy; I will ask nothing except that, now.'

'I can't say anything except that I will come to Croydon if you wish
it.'

'And reproach me always because you have to live in such a place, away
from your friends, without a hope of the social success which was your
dearest ambition?'

Her practical denial that she loved him wrung this taunt from his
anguished heart. He repented the words as soon as they were spoken.

'What is the good?' exclaimed Amy in irritation, rising and moving away
from him. 'How can I pretend that I look forward to such a life with any
hope?'

He stood in mute misery, inwardly cursing himself and his fate.

'I have said I will come,' she continued, her voice shaken with nervous
tension. 'Ask me or not, as you please, when you are ready to go there.
I can't talk about it.'

'I shall not ask you,' he replied. 'I will have no woman slave dragging
out a weary life with me. Either you are my willing wife, or you are
nothing to me.'

'I am married to you, and that can't be undone. I repeat that I shan't
refuse to obey you. I shall say no more.'

She moved to a distance, and there seated herself, half turned from him.

'I shall never ask you to come,' said Reardon, breaking a short silence.
'If our married life is ever to begin again it must be of your seeking.
Come to me of your own will, and I shall never reject you. But I will
die in utter loneliness rather than ask you again.'

He lingered a few moments, watching her; she did not move. Then he took
his hat, went in silence from the room, and left the house.

It rained harder than before. As no trains were running at this hour,
he walked in the direction where he would be likely to meet with an
omnibus. But it was a long time before one passed which was any use to
him. When he reached home he was in cheerless plight enough; to make
things pleasanter, one of his boots had let in water abundantly.

'The first sore throat of the season, no doubt,' he muttered to himself.

Nor was he disappointed. By Tuesday the cold had firm grip of him. A
day or two of influenza or sore throat always made him so weak that with
difficulty he supported the least physical exertion; but at present he
must go to his work at the hospital. Why stay at home? To what purpose
spare himself? It was not as if life had any promise for him. He was
a machine for earning so much money a week, and would at least give
faithful work for his wages until the day of final breakdown.

But, midway in the week, Carter discovered how ill his clerk was.

'You ought to be in bed, my dear fellow, with gruel and mustard plasters
and all the rest of it. Go home and take care of yourself--I insist upon
it.'

Before leaving the office, Reardon wrote a few lines to Biffen, whom he
had visited on the Monday. 'Come and see me if you can. I am down with a
bad cold, and have to keep in for the rest of the week. All the same,
I feel far more cheerful. Bring a new chapter of your exhilarating
romance.'



CHAPTER XXVI. MARRIED WOMAN'S PROPERTY

On her return from church that Sunday Mrs Edmund Yule was anxious to
learn the result of the meeting between Amy and her husband. She hoped
fervently that Amy's anomalous position would come to an end now that
Reardon had the offer of something better than a mere clerkship. John
Yule never ceased to grumble at his sister's permanence in the house,
especially since he had learnt that the money sent by Reardon each month
was not made use of; why it should not be applied for household expenses
passed his understanding.

'It seems to me,' he remarked several times, 'that the fellow only does
his bare duty in sending it. What is it to anyone else whether he
lives on twelve shillings a week or twelve pence? It is his business
to support his wife; if he can't do that, to contribute as much to her
support as possible. Amy's scruples are all very fine, if she could
afford them; it's very nice to pay for your delicacies of feeling out of
other people's pockets.'

'There'll have to be a formal separation,' was the startling
announcement with which Amy answered her mother's inquiry as to what had
passed.

'A separation? But, my dear--!'

Mrs Yule could not express her disappointment and dismay.

'We couldn't live together; it's no use trying.'

'But at your age, Amy! How can you think of anything so shocking? And
then, you know it will be impossible for him to make you a sufficient
allowance.'

'I shall have to live as well as I can on the seventy-five pounds a
year. If you can't afford to let me stay with you for that, I must go
into cheap lodgings in the country, like poor Mrs Butcher did.'

This was wild talking for Amy. The interview had upset her, and for the
rest of the day she kept apart in her own room. On the morrow Mrs Yule
succeeded in eliciting a clear account of the conversation which had
ended so hopelessly.

'I would rather spend the rest of my days in the workhouse than beg him
to take me back,' was Amy's final comment, uttered with the earnestness
which her mother understood but too well.

'But you are willing to go back, dear?'

'I told him so.'

'Then you must leave this to me. The Carters will let us know how things
go on, and when it seems to be time I must see Edwin myself.'

'I can't allow that. Anything you could say on your own account would be
useless, and there is nothing to say from me.'

Mrs Yule kept her own counsel. She had a full month before her during
which to consider the situation, but it was clear to her that these
young people must be brought together again. Her estimate of Reardon's
mental condition had undergone a sudden change from the moment when she
heard that a respectable post was within his reach; she decided that
he was 'strange,' but then all men of literary talent had marked
singularities, and doubtless she had been too hasty in interpreting the
peculiar features natural to a character such as his.

A few days later arrived the news of their relative's death at
Wattleborough.

This threw Mrs Yule into a commotion. At first she decided to accompany
her son and be present at the funeral; after changing her mind twenty
times, she determined not to go. John must send or bring back the news
as soon as possible. That it would be of a nature sensibly to affect
her own position, if not that of her children, she had little doubt;
her husband had been the favourite brother of the deceased, and on that
account there was no saying how handsome a legacy she might receive. She
dreamt of houses in South Kensington, of social ambitions gratified even
thus late.

On the morning after the funeral came a postcard announcing John's
return by a certain train, but no scrap of news was added.

'Just like that irritating boy! We must go to the station to meet him.
You'll come, won't you, Amy?'

Amy readily consented, for she too had hopes, though circumstances
blurred them. Mother and daughter were walking about the platform
half an hour before the train was due; their agitation would have been
manifest to anyone observing them. When at length the train rolled in
and John was discovered, they pressed eagerly upon him.

'Don't you excite yourself,' he said gruffly to his mother. 'There's no
reason whatever.'

Mrs Yule glanced in dismay at Amy. They followed John to a cab, and took
places with him.

'Now don't be provoking, Jack. Just tell us at once.'

'By all means. You haven't a penny.'

'I haven't? You are joking, ridiculous boy!'

'Never felt less disposed to, I assure you.'

After staring out of the window for a minute or two, he at length
informed Amy of the extent to which she profited by her uncle's decease,
then made known what was bequeathed to himself. His temper grew worse
every moment, and he replied savagely to each successive question
concerning the other items of the will.

'What have you to grumble about?' asked Amy, whose face was exultant
notwithstanding the drawbacks attaching to her good fortune. 'If Uncle
Alfred receives nothing at all, and mother has nothing, you ought to
think yourself very lucky.'

'It's very easy for you to say that, with your ten thousand.'

'But is it her own?' asked Mrs Yule. 'Is it for her separate use?'

'Of course it is. She gets the benefit of last year's Married Woman's
Property Act. The will was executed in January this year, and I dare say
the old curmudgeon destroyed a former one.

'What a splendid Act of Parliament that is!' cried Amy. 'The only one
worth anything that I ever heard of.'

'But my dear--' began her mother, in a tone of protest. However, she
reserved her comment for a more fitting time and place, and merely said:
'I wonder whether he had heard what has been going on?'

'Do you think he would have altered his will if he had?' asked Amy with
a smile of security.

'Why the deuce he should have left you so much in any case is more
than I can understand,' growled her brother. 'What's the use to me of
a paltry thousand or two? It isn't enough to invest; isn't enough to do
anything with.'

'You may depend upon it your cousin Marian thinks her five thousand
good for something,' said Mrs Yule. 'Who was at the funeral? Don't be
so surly, Jack; tell us all about it. I'm sure if anyone has cause to be
ill-tempered it's poor me.'

Thus they talked, amid the rattle of the cab-wheels. By when they
reached home silence had fallen upon them, and each one was sufficiently
occupied with private thoughts.

Mrs Yule's servants had a terrible time of it for the next few days. Too
affectionate to turn her ill-temper against John and Amy, she relieved
herself by severity to the domestic slaves, as an English matron is of
course justified in doing. Her daughter's position caused her even more
concern than before; she constantly lamented to herself: 'Oh, why didn't
he die before she was married!'--in which case Amy would never have
dreamt of wedding a penniless author. Amy declined to discuss the new
aspect of things until twenty-four hours after John's return; then she
said:

'I shall do nothing whatever until the money is paid to me. And what I
shall do then I don't know.'

'You are sure to hear from Edwin,' opined Mrs Yule.

'I think not. He isn't the kind of man to behave in that way.'

'Then I suppose you are bound to take the first step?'

'That I shall never do.'

She said so, but the sudden happiness of finding herself wealthy was
not without its softening effect on Amy's feelings. Generous impulses
alternated with moods of discontent. The thought of her husband in his
squalid lodgings tempted her to forget injuries and disillusions, and to
play the part of a generous wife. It would be possible now for them to
go abroad and spend a year or two in healthful travel; the result in
Reardon's case might be wonderful. He might recover all the energy of
his imagination, and resume his literary career from the point he had
reached at the time of his marriage.

On the other hand, was it not more likely that he would lapse into a
life of scholarly self-indulgence, such as he had often told her was
his ideal? In that event, what tedium and regret lay before her! Ten
thousand pounds sounded well, but what did it represent in reality? A
poor four hundred a year, perhaps; mere decency of obscure existence,
unless her husband could glorify it by winning fame. If he did nothing,
she would be the wife of a man who had failed in literature. She would
not be able to take a place in society. Life would be supported without
struggle; nothing more to be hoped.

This view of the future possessed her strongly when, on the second day,
she went to communicate her news to Mrs Carter. This amiable lady had
now become what she always desired to be, Amy's intimate friend; they
saw each other very frequently, and conversed of most things with much
frankness. It was between eleven and twelve in the morning when Amy paid
her visit, and she found Mrs Carter on the point of going out.

'I was coming to see you,' cried Edith. 'Why haven't you let me know of
what has happened?'

'You have heard, I suppose?'

'Albert heard from your brother.'

'I supposed he would. And I haven't felt in the mood for talking about
it, even with you.'

They went into Mrs Carter's boudoir, a tiny room full of such pretty
things as can be purchased nowadays by anyone who has a few shillings
to spare, and tolerable taste either of their own or at second-hand. Had
she been left to her instincts, Edith would have surrounded herself with
objects representing a much earlier stage of artistic development; but
she was quick to imitate what fashion declared becoming. Her husband
regarded her as a remarkable authority in all matters of personal or
domestic ornamentation.

'And what are you going to do?' she inquired, examining Amy from head
to foot, as if she thought that the inheritance of so substantial a sum
must have produced visible changes in her friend.

'I am going to do nothing.'

'But surely you're not in low spirits?'

'What have I to rejoice about?'

They talked for a while before Amy brought herself to utter what she was
thinking.

'Isn't it a most ridiculous thing that married people who both wish to
separate can't do so and be quite free again?'

'I suppose it would lead to all sorts of troubles--don't you think?'

'So people say about every new step in civilisation. What would have
been thought twenty years ago of a proposal to make all married women
independent of their husbands in money matters? All sorts of absurd
dangers were foreseen, no doubt. And it's the same now about divorce.
In America people can get divorced if they don't suit each other--at
all events in some of the States--and does any harm come of it? Just the
opposite I should think.'

Edith mused. Such speculations were daring, but she had grown accustomed
to think of Amy as an 'advanced' woman, and liked to imitate her in this
respect.

'It does seem reasonable,' she murmured.

'The law ought to encourage such separations, instead of forbidding
them,' Amy pursued. 'If a husband and wife find that they have made
a mistake, what useless cruelty it is to condemn them to suffer the
consequences for the whole of their lives!'

'I suppose it's to make people careful,' said Edith, with a laugh.

'If so, we know that it has always failed, and always will fail; so the
sooner such a profitless law is altered the better. Isn't there some
society for getting that kind of reform? I would subscribe fifty pounds
a year to help it. Wouldn't you?'

'Yes, if I had it to spare,' replied the other.

Then they both laughed, but Edith the more naturally.

'Not on my own account, you know,' she added.

'It's because women who are happily married can't and won't understand
the position of those who are not that there's so much difficulty in
reforming marriage laws.'

'But I understand you, Amy, and I grieve about you. What you are to do I
can't think.'

'Oh, it's easy to see what I shall do. Of course I have no choice
really. And I ought to have a choice; that's the hardship and the wrong
of it. Perhaps if I had, I should find a sort of pleasure in sacrificing
myself.'

There were some new novels on the table; Amy took up a volume presently,
and glanced over a page or two.

'I don't know how you can go on reading that sort of stuff, book after
book,' she exclaimed.

'Oh, but people say this last novel of Markland's is one of his best.'

'Best or worst, novels are all the same. Nothing but love, love, love;
what silly nonsense it is! Why don't people write about the really
important things of life? Some of the French novelists do; several of
Balzac's, for instance. I have just been reading his "Cousin Pons," a
terrible book, but I enjoyed it ever so much because it was nothing like
a love story. What rubbish is printed about love!'

'I get rather tired of it sometimes,' admitted Edith with amusement.

'I should hope you do, indeed. What downright lies are accepted as
indisputable! That about love being a woman's whole life; who believes
it really? Love is the most insignificant thing in most women's lives.
It occupies a few months, possibly a year or two, and even then I doubt
if it is often the first consideration.'

Edith held her head aside, and pondered smilingly.

'I'm sure there's a great opportunity for some clever novelist who will
never write about love at all.'

'But then it does come into life.'

'Yes, for a month or two, as I say. Think of the biographies of men and
women; how many pages are devoted to their love affairs? Compare those
books with novels which profess to be biographies, and you see how false
such pictures are. Think of the very words "novel," "romance"--what do
they mean but exaggeration of one bit of life?'

'That may be true. But why do people find the subject so interesting?'

'Because there is so little love in real life. That's the truth of
it. Why do poor people care only for stories about the rich? The same
principle.'

'How clever you are, Amy!'

'Am I? It's very nice to be told so. Perhaps I have some cleverness of a
kind; but what use is it to me? My life is being wasted. I ought to
have a place in the society of clever people. I was never meant to live
quietly in the background. Oh, if I hadn't been in such a hurry, and so
inexperienced!'

'Oh, I wanted to ask you,' said Edith, soon after this. 'Do you wish
Albert to say anything about you--at the hospital?'

'There's no reason why he shouldn't.'

'You won't even write to say--?'

'I shall do nothing.'

Since the parting from her husband, there had proceeded in Amy
a noticeable maturing of intellect. Probably the one thing was a
consequence of the other. During that last year in the flat her mind
was held captive by material cares, and this arrest of her natural
development doubtless had much to do with the appearance of acerbity
in a character which had displayed so much sweetness, so much womanly
grace. Moreover, it was arrest at a critical point. When she fell in
love with Edwin Reardon her mind had still to undergo the culture of
circumstances; though a woman in years she had seen nothing of life but
a few phases of artificial society, and her education had not progressed
beyond the final schoolgirl stage. Submitting herself to Reardon's
influence, she passed through what was a highly useful training of the
intellect; but with the result that she became clearly conscious of the
divergence between herself and her husband. In endeavouring to imbue her
with his own literary tastes, Reardon instructed Amy as to the natural
tendencies of her mind, which till then she had not clearly understood.
When she ceased to read with the eyes of passion, most of the things
which were Reardon's supreme interests lost their value for her. A sound
intelligence enabled her to think and feel in many directions, but the
special line of her growth lay apart from that in which the novelist and
classical scholar had directed her.

When she found herself alone and independent, her mind acted like a
spring when pressure is removed. After a few weeks of desoeuvrement she
obeyed the impulse to occupy herself with a kind of reading alien
to Reardon's sympathies. The solid periodicals attracted her, and
especially those articles which dealt with themes of social science.
Anything that savoured of newness and boldness in philosophic thought
had a charm for her palate. She read a good deal of that kind of
literature which may be defined as specialism popularised; writing which
addresses itself to educated, but not strictly studious, persons, and
which forms the reservoir of conversation for society above the sphere
of turf and west-endism. Thus, for instance, though she could not
undertake the volumes of Herbert Spencer, she was intelligently
acquainted with the tenor of their contents; and though she had never
opened one of Darwin's books, her knowledge of his main theories and
illustrations was respectable. She was becoming a typical woman of the
new time, the woman who has developed concurrently with journalistic
enterprise.

Not many days after that conversation with Edith Carter, she had
occasion to visit Mudie's, for the new number of some periodical which
contained an appetising title. As it was a sunny and warm day she walked
to New Oxford Street from the nearest Metropolitan station. Whilst
waiting at the library counter, she heard a familiar voice in her
proximity; it was that of Jasper Milvain, who stood talking with a
middle-aged lady. As Amy turned to look at him his eye met hers; clearly
he had been aware of her. The review she desired was handed to her; she
moved aside, and turned over the pages. Then Milvain walked up.

He was armed cap-a-pie in the fashions of suave society; no Bohemianism
of garb or person, for Jasper knew he could not afford that kind of
economy. On her part, Amy was much better dressed than usual, a costume
suited to her position of bereaved heiress.

'What a time since we met!' said Jasper, taking her delicately gloved
hand and looking into her face with his most effective smile.

'And why?' asked Amy.

'Indeed, I hardly know. I hope Mrs Yule is well?'

'Quite, thank you.'

It seemed as if he would draw back to let her pass, and so make an end
of the colloquy. But Amy, though she moved forward, added a remark:

'I don't see your name in any of this month's magazines.'

'I have nothing signed this month. A short review in The Current, that's
all.'

'But I suppose you write as much as ever?'

'Yes; but chiefly in weekly papers just now. You don't see the
Will-o'-the-Wisp?'

'Oh yes. And I think I can generally recognise your hand.'

They issued from the library.

'Which way are you going?' Jasper inquired, with something more of the
old freedom.

'I walked from Gower Street station, and I think, as it's so fine, I
shall walk back again.'

He accompanied her. They turned up Museum Street, and Amy, after a short
silence, made inquiry concerning his sisters.

'I am sorry I saw them only once, but no doubt you thought it better to
let the acquaintance end there.'

'I really didn't think of it in that way at all,' Jasper replied.'We
naturally understood it so, when you even ceased to call, yourself.'

'But don't you feel that there would have been a good deal of
awkwardness in my coming to Mrs Yule's?'

'Seeing that you looked at things from my husband's point of view?'

'Oh, that's a mistake! I have only seen your husband once since he went
to Islington.'

Amy gave him a look of surprise.

'You are not on friendly terms with him?'

'Well, we have drifted apart. For some reason he seemed to think that my
companionship was not very profitable. So it was better, on the whole,
that I should see neither you nor him.'

Amy was wondering whether he had heard of her legacy. He might have been
informed by a Wattleborough correspondent, even if no one in London had
told him.

'Do your sisters keep up their friendship with my cousin Marian?' she
asked, quitting the previous difficult topic.

'Oh yes!' He smiled. 'They see a great deal of each other.'

'Then of course you have heard of my uncle's death?'

'Yes. I hope all your difficulties are now at an end.'

Amy delayed a moment, then said: 'I hope so,' without any emphasis.

'Do you think of spending this winter abroad?'

It was the nearest he could come to a question concerning the future of
Amy and her husband.

'Everything is still quite uncertain. But tell me something about our
old acquaintances. How does Mr Biffen get on?'

'I scarcely ever see him, but I think he pegs away at an interminable
novel, which no one will publish when it's done. Whelpdale I meet
occasionally.'

He talked of the latter's projects and achievements in a lively strain.

'Your own prospects continue to brighten, no doubt,' said Amy.

'I really think they do. Things go fairly well. And I have lately
received a promise of very valuable help.'

'From whom?'

'A relative of yours.'

Amy turned to interrogate him with a look.

'A relative? You mean--?'

'Yes; Marian.'

They were passing Bedford Square. Amy glanced at the trees, now
almost bare of foliage; then her eyes met Jasper's, and she smiled
significantly.

'I should have thought your aim would have been far more ambitious,' she
said, with distinct utterance.

'Marian and I have been engaged for some time--practically.'

'Indeed? I remember now how you once spoke of her. And you will be
married soon?'

'Probably before the end of the year. I see that you are criticising my
motives. I am quite prepared for that in everyone who knows me and the
circumstances. But you must remember that I couldn't foresee anything of
this kind. It enables us to marry sooner, that's all.'

'I am sure your motives are unassailable,' replied Amy, still with a
smile. 'I imagined that you wouldn't marry for years, and then some
distinguished person. This throws new light upon your character.'

'You thought me so desperately scheming and cold-blooded?'

'Oh dear no! But--well, to be sure, I can't say that I know Marian. I
haven't seen her for years and years. She may be admirably suited to
you.'

'Depend upon it, I think so.'

'She's likely to shine in society? She is a brilliant girl, full of tact
and insight?'

'Scarcely all that, perhaps.'

He looked dubiously at his companion.

'Then you have abandoned your old ambitions?' Amy pursued.

'Not a bit of it. I am on the way to achieve them.'

'And Marian is the ideal wife to assist you?'

'From one point of view, yes. Pray, why all this ironic questioning?'

'Not ironic at all.'

'It sounded very much like it, and I know from of old that you have a
tendency that way.'

'The news surprised me a little, I confess. But I see that I am in
danger of offending you.'

'Let us wait another five years, and then I will ask your opinion as
to the success of my marriage. I don't take a step of this kind without
maturely considering it. Have I made many blunders as yet?'

'As yet, not that I know of.'

