'I am told that Mr Dolomore is becoming a great friend of yours.'

The girl's face changed. She drew herself up, and looked away towards
the window.

'I don't know that he is a "great" friend.'

'Still, he pays enough attention to you to excite remark.'

'Whose remark?'

'That of several people who go to Mrs Lane's.'

'I don't know any reason for it,' said Maud coldly.

'Look here, Maud, you don't mind if I give you a friendly warning?'

She kept silence, with a look of superiority to all monition.

'Dolomore,' pursued her brother, 'is all very well in his way, but
that way isn't yours. I believe he has a good deal of money, but he
has neither brains nor principle. There's no harm in your observing
the nature and habits of such individuals, but don't allow yourself to
forget that they are altogether beneath you.'

'There's no need whatever for you to teach me self-respect,' replied the
girl.

'I'm quite sure of that; but you are inexperienced. On the whole, I do
rather wish that you would go less frequently to Mrs Lane's.

It was rather an unfortunate choice of yours. Very much better if you
could have got on a good footing with the Barnabys. If you are generally
looked upon as belonging to the Lanes' set it will make it difficult for
you to get in with the better people.'

Maud was not to be drawn into argument, and Jasper could only hope that
his words would have some weight with her. The Mr Dolomore in question
was a young man of rather offensive type--athletic, dandiacal, and
half-educated. It astonished Jasper that his sister could tolerate such
an empty creature for a moment; who has not felt the like surprise with
regard to women's inclinations? He talked with Dora about it, but she
was not in her sister's confidence.

'I think you ought to have some influence with her,' Jasper said.

'Maud won't allow anyone to interfere in--her private affairs.''It would
be unfortunate if she made me quarrel with her.'

'Oh, surely there isn't any danger of that?'

'I don't know, she mustn't be obstinate.'

Jasper himself saw a good deal of miscellaneous society at this time. He
could not work so persistently as usual, and with wise tactics he used
the seasons of enforced leisure to extend his acquaintance. Marian and
he were together twice a week, in the evening.

Of his old Bohemian associates he kept up intimate relations with one
only, and that was Whelpdale. This was in a measure obligatory, for
Whelpdale frequently came to see him, and it would have been difficult
to repel a man who was always making known how highly he esteemed the
privilege of Milvain's friendship, and whose company on the whole was
agreeable enough. At the present juncture Whelpdale's cheery flattery
was a distinct assistance; it helped to support Jasper in his
self-confidence, and to keep the brightest complexion on the prospect to
which he had committed himself.

'Whelpdale is anxious to make Marian's acquaintance,' Jasper said to his
sisters one day. 'Shall we have him here tomorrow evening?'

'Just as you like,' Maud replied.

'You won't object, Dora?'

'Oh no! I rather like Mr Whelpdale.'

'If I were to repeat that to him he'd go wild with delight. But don't
be afraid; I shan't. I'll ask him to come for an hour, and trust to his
discretion not to bore us by staying too long.'

A note was posted to Whelpdale; he was invited to present himself at
eight o'clock, by which time Marian would have arrived. Jasper's room
was to be the scene of the assembly, and punctual to the minute the
literary adviser appeared. He was dressed with all the finish his
wardrobe allowed, and his face beamed with gratification; it was rapture
to him to enter the presence of these three girls, one of whom he had,
more suo, held in romantic remembrance since his one meeting with her at
Jasper's old lodgings. His eyes melted with tenderness as he approached
Dora and saw her smile of gracious recognition. By Maud he was
profoundly impressed. Marian inspired him with no awe, but he fully
appreciated the charm of her features and her modest gravity. After all,
it was to Dora that his eyes turned again most naturally. He thought
her exquisite, and, rather than be long without a glimpse of her, he
contented himself with fixing his eyes on the hem of her dress and the
boot-toe that occasionally peeped from beneath it.

As was to be expected in such a circle, conversation soon turned to the
subject of literary struggles.

'I always feel it rather humiliating,' said Jasper, 'that I have gone
through no very serious hardships. It must be so gratifying to say to
young fellows who are just beginning:

"Ah, I remember when I was within an ace of starving to death," and
then come out with Grub Street reminiscences of the most appalling kind.
Unfortunately, I have always had enough to eat.'

'I haven't,' exclaimed Whelpdale. 'I have lived for five days on a few
cents' worth of pea-nuts in the States.'

'What are pea-nuts, Mr Whelpdale?' asked Dora.

Delighted with the question, Whelpdale described that undesirable
species of food.

'It was in Troy,' he went on, 'Troy, N.Y. To think that a man should
live on pea-nuts in a town called Troy!'

'Tell us those adventures,' cried Jasper. 'It's a long time since I
heard them, and the girls will enjoy it vastly.'

Dora looked at him with such good-humoured interest that the traveller
needed no further persuasion.

'It came to pass in those days,' he began, 'that I inherited from my
godfather a small, a very small, sum of money. I was making strenuous
efforts to write for magazines, with absolutely no encouragement.
As everybody was talking just then of the Centennial Exhibition at
Philadelphia, I conceived the brilliant idea of crossing the Atlantic,
in the hope that I might find valuable literary material at the
Exhibition--or Exposition, as they called it--and elsewhere. I won't
trouble you with an account of how I lived whilst I still had money;
sufficient that no one would accept the articles I sent to England,
and that at last I got into perilous straits. I went to New York, and
thought of returning home, but the spirit of adventure was strong in me.
"I'll go West," I said to myself. "There I am bound to find material."
And go I did, taking an emigrant ticket to Chicago. It was December, and
I should like you to imagine what a journey of a thousand miles by an
emigrant train meant at that season. The cars were deadly cold, and what
with that and the hardness of the seats I found it impossible to sleep;
it reminded me of tortures I had read about; I thought my brain would
have burst with the need of sleeping. At Cleveland, in Ohio, we had to
wait several hours in the night; I left the station and wandered about
till I found myself on the edge of a great cliff that looked over Lake
Erie. A magnificent picture! Brilliant moonlight, and all the lake away
to the horizon frozen and covered with snow. The clocks struck two as I
stood there.'

He was interrupted by the entrance of a servant who brought coffee.

'Nothing could be more welcome,' cried Dora. 'Mr Whelpdale makes one
feel quite chilly.'

There was laughter and chatting whilst Maud poured out the beverage.
Then Whelpdale pursued his narrative.

'I reached Chicago with not quite five dollars in my pockets, and, with
a courage which I now marvel at, I paid immediately four dollars and a
half for a week's board and lodging. "Well," I said to myself, "for a
week I am safe. If I earn nothing in that time, at least I shall owe
nothing when I have to turn out into the streets." It was a rather dirty
little boarding-house, in Wabash Avenue, and occupied, as I soon found,
almost entirely by actors. There was no fireplace in my bedroom, and
if there had been I couldn't have afforded a fire. But that mattered
little; what I had to do was to set forth and discover some way of
making money. Don't suppose that I was in a desperate state of mind;
how it was, I don't quite know, but I felt decidedly cheerful. It was
pleasant to be in this new region of the earth, and I went about the
town like a tourist who has abundant resources.'

He sipped his coffee.

'I saw nothing for it but to apply at the office of some newspaper, and
as I happened to light upon the biggest of them first of all, I put on
a bold face, marched in, asked if I could see the editor. There was no
difficulty whatever about this; I was told to ascend by means of the
"elevator" to an upper storey, and there I walked into a comfortable
little room where a youngish man sat smoking a cigar at a table covered
with print and manuscript. I introduced myself, stated my business. "Can
you give me work of any kind on your paper?" "Well, what experience have
you had?" "None whatever." The editor smiled. "I'm very much afraid you
would be no use to us. But what do you think you could do?" Well now,
there was but one thing that by any possibility I could do. I asked him:
"Do you publish any fiction--short stories?" "Yes, we're always glad
of a short story, if it's good." This was a big daily paper; they have
weekly supplements of all conceivable kinds of matter. "Well," I said,
"if I write a story of English life, will you consider it?" "With
pleasure." I left him, and went out as if my existence were henceforth
provided for.'

He laughed heartily, and was joined by his hearers.

'It was a great thing to be permitted to write a story, but then--what
story? I went down to the shore of Lake Michigan; walked there for half
an hour in an icy wind. Then I looked for a stationer's shop, and
laid out a few of my remaining cents in the purchase of pen, ink, and
paper--my stock of all these things was at an end when I left New York.
Then back to the boarding-house. Impossible to write in my bedroom, the
temperature was below zero; there was no choice but to sit down in the
common room, a place like the smoke-room of a poor commercial hotel in
England. A dozen men were gathered about the fire, smoking, talking,
quarrelling. Favourable conditions, you see, for literary effort. But
the story had to be written, and write it I did, sitting there at the
end of a deal table; I finished it in less than a couple of days, a
good long story, enough to fill three columns of the huge paper. I stand
amazed at my power of concentration as often as I think of it!'

'And was it accepted?' asked Dora.

'You shall hear. I took my manuscript to the editor, and he told me to
come and see him again next morning. I didn't forget the appointment.
As I entered he smiled in a very promising way, and said, "I think
your story will do. I'll put it into the Saturday supplement. Call on
Saturday morning and I'll remunerate you." How well I remember that
word "remunerate"! I have had an affection for the word ever since. And
remunerate me he did; scribbled something on a scrap of paper, which
I presented to the cashier. The sum was eighteen dollars. Behold me
saved!'

He sipped his coffee again.

'I have never come across an English editor who treated me with anything
like that consideration and general kindliness. How the man had time, in
his position, to see me so often, and do things in such a human way,
I can't understand. Imagine anyone trying the same at the office of a
London newspaper! To begin with, one couldn't see the editor at all. I
shall always think with profound gratitude of that man with the peaked
brown beard and pleasant smile.'

'But did the pea-nuts come after that!' inquired Dora.

'Alas! they did. For some months I supported myself in Chicago, writing
for that same paper, and for others. But at length the flow of my
inspiration was checked; I had written myself out. And I began to grow
home-sick, wanted to get back to England. The result was that I found
myself one day in New York again, but without money enough to pay for a
passage home. I tried to write one more story. But it happened, as I was
looking over newspapers in a reading-room, that I saw one of my Chicago
tales copied into a paper published at Troy. Now Troy was not very far
off; and it occurred to me that, if I went there, the editor of this
paper might be disposed to employ me, seeing he had a taste for my
fiction. And I went, up the Hudson by steamboat. On landing at Troy I
was as badly off as when I reached Chicago; I had less than a dollar.
And the worst of it was I had come on a vain errand; the editor treated
me with scant courtesy, and no work was to be got. I took a little room,
paying for it day by day, and in the meantime I fed on those loathsome
pea-nuts, buying a handful in the street now and then. And I assure you
I looked starvation in the face.'

'What sort of a town is Troy?' asked Marian, speaking for the first
time.

'Don't ask me. They make straw hats there principally, and they sell
pea-nuts. More I remember not.'

'But you didn't starve to death,' said Maud.

'No, I just didn't. I went one afternoon into a lawyer's office,
thinking I might get some copying work, and there I found an odd-looking
old man, sitting with an open Bible on his knees. He explained to me
that he wasn't the lawyer; that the lawyer was away on business,
and that he was just guarding the office. Well, could he help me?
He meditated, and a thought occurred to him. "Go," he said, "to
such-and-such a boarding-house, and ask for Mr Freeman Sterling. He is
just starting on a business tour, and wants a young man to accompany
him." I didn't dream of asking what the business was, but sped, as fast
as my trembling limbs would carry me, to the address he had mentioned. I
asked for Mr Freeman Sterling, and found him. He was a photographer,
and his business at present was to go about getting orders for the
reproducing of old portraits. A good-natured young fellow. He said he
liked the look of me, and on the spot engaged me to assist him in a
house-to-house visitation. He would pay for my board and lodging, and
give me a commission on all the orders I obtained. Forthwith I sat down
to a "square meal," and ate--my conscience, how I ate!'

'You were not eminently successful in that pursuit, I think?' said
Jasper.

'I don't think I got half-a-dozen orders. Yet that good Samaritan
supported me for five or six weeks, whilst we travelled from Troy to
Boston. It couldn't go on; I was ashamed of myself; at last I told
him that we must part. Upon my word, I believe he would have paid my
expenses for another month; why, I can't understand. But he had a vast
respect for me because I had written in newspapers, and I do seriously
think that he didn't like to tell me I was a useless fellow. We parted
on the very best of terms in Boston.'

'And you again had recourse to pea-nuts?' asked Dora.

'Well, no. In the meantime I had written to someone in England, begging
the loan of just enough money to enable me to get home. The money came a
day after I had seen Sterling off by train.'

An hour and a half quickly passed, and Jasper, who wished to have a few
minutes of Marian's company before it was time for her to go, cast a
significant glance at his sisters. Dora said innocently:

'You wished me to tell you when it was half-past nine, Marian.'

And Marian rose. This was a signal Whelpdale could not disregard.
Immediately he made ready for his own departure, and in less than five
minutes was gone, his face at the last moment expressing blended delight
and pain.

'Too good of you to have asked me to come,' he said with gratitude to
Jasper, who went to the door with him. 'You are a happy man, by Jove! A
happy man!'

When Jasper returned to the room his sisters had vanished. Marian
stood by the fire. He drew near to her, took her hands, and repeated
laughingly Whelpdale's last words.

'Is it true?' she asked.

'Tolerably true, I think.'

'Then I am as happy as you are.'

He released her hands, and moved a little apart.

'Marian, I have been thinking about that letter to your father. I had
better get it written, don't you think?'

She gazed at him with troubled eyes.

'Perhaps you had. Though we said it might be delayed until--'

'Yes, I know. But I suspect you had rather I didn't wait any longer.
Isn't that the truth?'

'Partly. Do just as you wish, Jasper.'

'I'll go and see him, if you like.'

'I am so afraid--No, writing will be better.'

'Very well. Then he shall have the letter to-morrow afternoon.'

'Don't let it come before the last post. I had so much rather not.
Manage it, if you can.'

'Very well. Now go and say good-night to the girls. It's a vile night,
and you must get home as soon as possible.'

She turned away, but again came towards him, murmuring:

'Just a word or two more.'

'About the letter?'

'No. You haven't said--'

He laughed.

'And you couldn't go away contentedly unless I repeated for the
hundredth time that I love you?'

Marian searched his countenance.

'Do you think it foolish? I live only on those words.'

'Well, they are better than pea-nuts.'

'Oh don't! I can't bear to--'

Jasper was unable to understand that such a jest sounded to her like
profanity. She hid her face against him, and whispered the words that
would have enraptured her had they but come from his lips. The young man
found it pleasant enough to be worshipped, but he could not reply as
she desired. A few phrases of tenderness, and his love-vocabulary
was exhausted; he even grew weary when something more--the indefinite
something--was vaguely required of him.

'You are a dear, good, tender-hearted girl,' he said, stroking her
short, soft hair, which was exquisite to the hand. 'Now go and get
ready.'

She left him, but stood for a few moments on the landing before going to
the girls' room.



CHAPTER XXIX. CATASTROPHE

Marian had finished the rough draft of a paper on James Harrington,
author of 'Oceana.' Her father went through it by the midnight lamp,
and the next morning made his comments. A black sky and sooty rain
strengthened his inclination to sit by the study fire and talk at large
in a tone of flattering benignity.

'Those paragraphs on the Rota Club strike me as singularly happy,' he
said, tapping the manuscript with the mouthpiece of his pipe. 'Perhaps
you might say a word or two more about Cyriac Skinner; one mustn't be
too allusive with general readers, their ignorance is incredible. But
there is so little to add to this paper--so little to alter--that I
couldn't feel justified in sending it as my own work. I think it is
altogether too good to appear anonymously. You must sign it, Marian, and
have the credit that is due to you.'

'Oh, do you think it's worth while?' answered the girl, who was far from
easy under this praise. Of late there had been too much of it; it made
her regard her father with suspicions which increased her sense of
trouble in keeping a momentous secret from him.

'Yes, yes; you had better sign it. I'll undertake there's no other girl
of your age who could turn out such a piece of work. I think we may
fairly say that your apprenticeship is at an end. Before long,' he
smiled anxiously, 'I may be counting upon you as a valued contributor.
And that reminds me; would you be disposed to call with me on the
Jedwoods at their house next Sunday?'

Marian understood the intention that lay beneath this proposal. She
saw that her father would not allow himself to seem discouraged by the
silence she maintained on the great subject which awaited her decision.
He was endeavouring gradually to involve her in his ambitions, to carry
her forward by insensible steps. It pained her to observe the suppressed
eagerness with which he looked for her reply.

'I will go if you wish, father, but I had rather not.'

'I feel sure you would like Mrs Jedwood. One has no great opinion of her
novels, but she is a woman of some intellect. Let me book you for next
Sunday; surely I have a claim to your companionship now and then.'

Marian kept silence. Yule puffed at his pipe, then said with a
speculative air:

'I suppose it has never even occurred to you to try your hand at
fiction?'

'I haven't the least inclination that way.'

'You would probably do something rather good if you tried. But I don't
urge it. My own efforts in that line were a mistake, I'm disposed to
think. Not that the things were worse than multitudes of books which
nowadays go down with the many-headed. But I never quite knew what I
wished to be at in fiction. I wasn't content to write a mere narrative
of the exciting kind, yet I couldn't hit upon subjects of intellectual
cast that altogether satisfied me. Well, well; I have tried my hand
at most kinds of literature. Assuredly I merit the title of man of
letters.'

'You certainly do.'

'By-the-by, what should you think of that title for a review--Letters?
It has never been used, so far as I know. I like the word "letters."
How much better "a man of letters" than "a literary man"! And apropos of
that, when was the word "literature" first used in our modern sense
to signify a body of writing? In Johnson's day it was pretty much the
equivalent of our "culture." You remember his saying, "It is surprising
how little literature people have." His dictionary, I believe, defines
the word as "learning, skill in letters"--nothing else.'

It was characteristic of Yule to dwell with gusto on little points such
as this; he prosed for a quarter of an hour, with a pause every now and
then whilst he kept his pipe alight.

'I think Letters wouldn't be amiss,' he said at length, returning to
the suggestion which he wished to keep before Marian's mind. 'It would
clearly indicate our scope. No articles on bimetallism, as Quarmby
said--wasn't it Quarmby?'

He laughed idly.

'Yes, I must ask Jedwood how he likes the name.'

Though Marian feared the result, she was glad when Jasper made up his
mind to write to her father. Since it was determined that her money
could not be devoted to establishing a review, the truth ought to be
confessed before Yule had gone too far in nursing his dangerous hope.
Without the support of her love and all the prospects connected with it,
she would hardly have been capable of giving a distinct refusal when her
reply could no longer be postponed; to hold the money merely for her own
benefit would have seemed to her too selfish, however slight her faith
in the project on which her father built so exultantly. When it was
declared that she had accepted an offer of marriage, a sacrifice of that
kind could no longer be expected of her. Opposition must direct itself
against the choice she had made. It would be stern, perhaps relentless;
but she felt able to face any extremity of wrath. Her nerves quivered,
but in her heart was an exhaustless source of courage.

That a change had somehow come about in the girl Yule was aware. He
observed her with the closest study day after day. Her health seemed
to have improved; after a long spell of work she had not the air of
despondent weariness which had sometimes irritated him, sometimes
made him uneasy. She was more womanly in her bearing and speech, and
exercised an independence, appropriate indeed to her years, but such
as had not formerly declared itself The question with her father
was whether these things resulted simply from her consciousness of
possessing what to her seemed wealth, or something else had happened
of the nature that he dreaded. An alarming symptom was the increased
attention she paid to her personal appearance; its indications were
not at all prominent, but Yule, on the watch for such things, did not
overlook them. True, this also might mean nothing but a sense of relief
from narrow means; a girl would naturally adorn herself a little under
the circumstances.

His doubts came to an end two days after that proposal of a title for
the new review. As he sat in his study the servant brought him a letter
delivered by the last evening post. The handwriting was unknown to him;
the contents were these:

'DEAR MR YULE,--It is my desire to write to you with perfect frankness
and as simply as I can on a subject which has the deepest interest for
me, and which I trust you will consider in that spirit of kindness with
which you received me when we first met at Finden.

'On the occasion of that meeting I had the happiness of being presented
to Miss Yule. She was not totally a stranger to me; at that time I used
to work pretty regularly in the Museum Reading-room, and there I had
seen Miss Yule, had ventured to observe her at moments with a young
man's attention, and had felt my interest aroused, though I did not
know her name. To find her at Finden seemed to me a very unusual and
delightful piece of good fortune.

When I came back from my holiday I was conscious of a new purpose in
life, a new desire and a new motive to help me on in my chosen career.

'My mother's death led to my sisters' coming to live in London. Already
there had been friendly correspondence between Miss Yule and the two
girls, and now that the opportunity offered they began to see each other
frequently. As I was often at my sisters' lodgings it came about that
I met Miss Yule there from time to time. In this way was confirmed my
attachment to your daughter. The better I knew her, the more worthy I
found her of reverence and love.

'Would it not have been natural for me to seek a renewal of the
acquaintance with yourself which had been begun in the country? Gladly I
should have done so. Before my sisters' coming to London I did call one
day at your house with the desire of seeing you, but unfortunately you
were not at home. Very soon after that I learnt to my extreme regret
that my connection with The Current and its editor would make any
repetition of my visit very distasteful to you. I was conscious of
nothing in my literary life that could justly offend you--and at this
day I can say the same--but I shrank from the appearance of importunity,
and for some months I was deeply distressed by the fear that what I most
desired in life had become unattainable. My means were very slight; I
had no choice but to take such work as offered, and mere chance had put
me into a position which threatened ruin to the hope that you would some
day regard me as a not unworthy suitor for your daughter's hand.

'Circumstances have led me to a step which at that time seemed
impossible. Having discovered that Miss Yule returned the feeling
I entertained for her, I have asked her to be my wife, and she has
consented. It is now my hope that you will permit me to call upon you.
Miss Yule is aware that I am writing this letter; will you not let her
plead for me, seeing that only by an unhappy chance have I been kept
aloof from you? Marian and I are equally desirous that you should
approve our union; without that approval, indeed, something will be
lacking to the happiness for which we hope.

'Believe me to be sincerely yours,

'JASPER MILVAIN.'

Half an hour after reading this Yule was roused from a fit of the
gloomiest brooding by Marian's entrance. She came towards him timidly,
with pale countenance. He had glanced round to see who it was, but at
once turned his head again.

'Will you forgive me for keeping this secret from you, father?'

'Forgive you?' he replied in a hard, deliberate voice. 'I assure you it
is a matter of perfect indifference to me. You are long since of age,
and I have no power whatever to prevent your falling a victim to any
schemer who takes your fancy. It would be folly in me to discuss the
question. I recognise your right to have as many secrets as may seem
good to you. To talk of forgiveness is the merest affectation.'

'No, I spoke sincerely. If it had seemed possible I should gladly have
let you know about this from the first. That would have been natural and
right. But you know what prevented me.'

'I do. I will try to hope that even a sense of shame had something to do
with it.'

'That had nothing to do with it,' said Marian, coldly. 'I have never had
reason to feel ashamed.'

'Be it so. I trust you may never have reason to feel repentance. May I
ask when you propose to be married?'

'I don't know when it will take place.'

'As soon, I suppose, as your uncle's executors have discharged a piece
of business which is distinctly germane to the matter?'

'Perhaps.'

'Does your mother know?'

'I have just told her.'

'Very well, then it seems to me that there's nothing more to be said.'

'Do you refuse to see Mr Milvain?'

'Most decidedly I do. You will have the goodness to inform him that that
is my reply to his letter.'

'I don't think that is the behaviour of a gentleman,' said Marian, her
eyes beginning to gleam with resentment.

'I am obliged to you for your instruction.'

'Will you tell me, father, in plain words, why you dislike Mr Milvain?'

'I am not inclined to repeat what I have already fruitlessly told you.
For the sake of a clear understanding, however, I will let you know the
practical result of my dislike. From the day of your marriage with that
man you are nothing to me. I shall distinctly forbid you to enter my
house. You make your choice, and go your own way. I shall hope never to
see your face again.'

Their eyes met, and the look of each seemed to fascinate the other.

'If you have made up your mind to that,' said Marian in a shaking
voice, 'I can remain here no longer. Such words are senselessly cruel.
To-morrow I shall leave the house.'

'I repeat that you are of age, and perfectly independent. It can be
nothing to me how soon you go. You have given proof that I am of less
than no account to you, and doubtless the sooner we cease to afflict
each other the better.'

It seemed as if the effect of these conflicts with her father were to
develop in Marian a vehemence of temper which at length matched that
of which Yule was the victim. Her face, outlined to express a gentle
gravity, was now haughtily passionate; nostrils and lips thrilled with
wrath, and her eyes were magnificent in their dark fieriness.

'You shall not need to tell me that again,' she answered, and
immediately left him.

She went into the sitting-room, where Mrs Yule was awaiting the result
of the interview.

'Mother,' she said, with stern gentleness, 'this house can no longer be
a home for me. I shall go away to-morrow, and live in lodgings until the
time of my marriage.'

Mrs Yule uttered a cry of pain, and started up.

'Oh, don't do that, Marian! What has he said to you? Come and talk to
me, darling--tell me what he's said--don't look like that!'

She clung to the girl despairingly, terrified by a transformation she
would have thought impossible.

'He says that if I marry Mr Milvain he hopes never to see my face again.
I can't stay here. You shall come and see me, and we will be the same
to each other as always. But father has treated me too unjustly. I can't
live near him after this.'

'He doesn't mean it,' sobbed her mother. 'He says what he's sorry for
as soon as the words are spoken. He loves you too much, my darling, to
drive you away like that. It's his disappointment, Marian; that's all it
is. He counted on it so much. I've heard him talk of it in his sleep;
he made so sure that he was going to have that new magazine, and the
disappointment makes him that he doesn't know what he's saying. Only
wait and see; he'll tell you he didn't mean it, I know he will. Only
leave him alone till he's had time to get over it. Do forgive him this
once.'

'It's like a madman to talk in that way,' said the girl, releasing
herself. 'Whatever his disappointment, I can't endure it. I have worked
hard for him, very hard, ever since I was old enough, and he owes me
some kindness, some respect. It would be different if he had the least
reason for his hatred of Jasper. It is nothing but insensate prejudice,
the result of his quarrels with other people. What right has he to
insult me by representing my future husband as a scheming hypocrite?'

'My love, he has had so much to bear--it's made him so quick-tempered.'

'Then I am quick-tempered too, and the sooner we are apart the better,
as he said himself.'

'Oh, but you have always been such a patient girl.'

'My patience is at an end when I am treated as if I had neither rights
nor feelings. However wrong the choice I had made, this was not the way
to behave to me. His disappointment? Is there a natural law, then, that
a daughter must be sacrificed to her father? My husband will have as
much need of that money as my father has, and he will be able to make
far better use of it. It was wrong even to ask me to give my money away
like that. I have a right to happiness, as well as other women.'

She was shaken with hysterical passion, the natural consequence of this
outbreak in a nature such as hers. Her mother, in the meantime,
grew stronger by force of profound love that at length had found its
opportunity of expression. Presently she persuaded Marian to come
upstairs with her, and before long the overburdened breast was relieved
by a flow of tears. But Marian's purpose remained unshaken.

'It is impossible for us to see each other day after day,' she said when
calmer. 'He can't control his anger against me, and I suffer too much
when I am made to feel like this. I shall take a lodging not far off
where you can see me often.'

'But you have no money, Marian,' replied Mrs Yule, miserably.

'No money? As if I couldn't borrow a few pounds until all my own comes
to me! Dora Milvain can lend me all I shall want; it won't make the
least difference to her. I must have my money very soon now.'

At about half-past eleven Mrs Yule went downstairs, and entered the
study.

'If you are coming to speak about Marian,' said her husband, turning
upon her with savage eyes, 'you can save your breath. I won't hear her
name mentioned.'

She faltered, but overcame her weakness.

'You are driving her away from us, Alfred. It isn't right! Oh, it isn't
right!'

'If she didn't go I should, so understand that! And if I go, you have
seen the last of me. Make your choice, make your choice!'

He had yielded himself to that perverse frenzy which impels a man to
acts and utterances most wildly at conflict with reason. His sense of
the monstrous irrationality to which he was committed completed what was
begun in him by the bitterness of a great frustration.

'If I wasn't a poor, helpless woman,' replied his wife, sinking upon a
chair and crying without raising her hands to her face, 'I'd go and live
with her till she was married, and then make a home for myself. But I
haven't a penny, and I'm too old to earn my own living; I should only be
a burden to her.'

'That shall be no hindrance,' cried Yule. 'Go, by all means; you shall
have a sufficient allowance as long as I can continue to work, and when
I'm past that, your lot will be no harder than mine. Your daughter had
the chance of making provision for my old age, at no expense to herself.
But that was asking too much of her. Go, by all means, and leave me to
make what I can of the rest of my life; perhaps I may save a few years
still from the curse brought upon me by my own folly.'

It was idle to address him. Mrs Yule went into the sitting-room, and
there sat weeping for an hour. Then she extinguished the lights, and
crept upstairs in silence.

Yule passed the night in the study. Towards morning he slept for an hour
or two, just long enough to let the fire go out and to get thoroughly
chilled. When he opened his eyes a muddy twilight had begun to show at
the window; the sounds of a clapping door within the house, which had
probably awakened him, made him aware that the servant was already up.

He drew up the blind. There seemed to be a frost, for the moisture
of last night had all disappeared, and the yard upon which the window
looked was unusually clean. With a glance at the black grate he
extinguished his lamp, and went out into the passage. A few minutes'
groping for his overcoat and hat, and he left the house.

His purpose was to warm himself with a vigorous walk, and at the
same time to shake off if possible, the nightmare of his rage and
hopelessness. He had no distinct feeling with regard to his behaviour of
the past evening; he neither justified nor condemned himself; he did not
ask himself whether Marian would to-day leave her home, or if her mother
would take him at his word and also depart. These seemed to be details
which his brain was too weary to consider. But he wished to be away from
the wretchedness of his house, and to let things go as they would
whilst he was absent. As he closed the front door he felt as if he were
escaping from an atmosphere that threatened to stifle him.

His steps directing themselves more by habit than with any deliberate
choice, he walked towards Camden Road. When he had reached Camden Town
railway-station he was attracted by a coffee-stall; a draught of
the steaming liquid, no matter its quality, would help his blood to
circulate. He laid down his penny, and first warmed his hands by holding
them round the cup. Whilst standing thus he noticed that the objects at
which he looked had a blurred appearance; his eyesight seemed to have
become worse this morning. Only a result of his insufficient sleep
perhaps. He took up a scrap of newspaper that lay on the stall; he could
read it, but one of his eyes was certainly weaker than the other; trying
to see with that one alone, he found that everything became misty.

He laughed, as if the threat of new calamity were an amusement in his
present state of mind. And at the same moment his look encountered that
of a man who had drawn near to him, a shabbily-dressed man of middle
age, whose face did not correspond with his attire.

'Will you give me a cup of coffee?' asked the stranger, in a low voice
and with shamefaced manner. 'It would be a great kindness.'

The accent was that of good breeding. Yule hesitated in surprise for a
moment, then said:

'Have one by all means. Would you care for anything to eat?'

'I am much obliged to you. I think I should be none the worse for one of
those solid slices of bread and butter.'

The stall-keeper was just extinguishing his lights; the frosty sky
showed a pale gleam of sunrise.

'Hard times, I'm afraid,' remarked Yule, as his beneficiary began to eat
the luncheon with much appearance of grateful appetite.

'Very hard times.' He had a small, thin, colourless countenance, with
large, pathetic eyes; a slight moustache and curly beard. His clothes
were such as would be worn by some very poor clerk. 'I came here an
hour ago,' he continued, 'with the hope of meeting an acquaintance who
generally goes from this station at a certain time. I have missed
him, and in doing so I missed what I had thought my one chance of a
breakfast. When one has neither dined nor supped on the previous day,
breakfast becomes a meal of some importance.'

'True. Take another slice.'

'I am greatly obliged to you.'

'Not at all. I have known hard times myself, and am likely to know
worse.'

'I trust not. This is the first time that I have positively begged.
I should have been too much ashamed to beg of the kind of men who are
usually at these places; they certainly have no money to spare. I was
thinking of making an appeal at a baker's shop, but it is very likely I
should have been handed over to a policeman. Indeed I don't know what I
should have done; the last point of endurance was almost reached. I have
no clothes but these I wear, and they are few enough for the season.
Still, I suppose the waistcoat must have gone.'

He did not talk like a beggar who is trying to excite compassion, but
with a sort of detached curiosity concerning the difficulties of his
position.

'You can find nothing to do?' said the man of letters.

'Positively nothing. By profession I am a surgeon, but it's a long time
since I practised. Fifteen years ago I was comfortably established at
Wakefield; I was married and had one child. But my capital ran out, and
my practice, never anything to boast of, fell to nothing. I succeeded
in getting a place as an assistant to a man at Chester. We sold up, and
started on the journey.'

He paused, looking at Yule in a strange way.

'What happened then?'

'You probably don't remember a railway accident that took place near
Crewe in that year--it was 1869? I and my wife and child were alone in
a carriage that was splintered. One moment I was talking with them, in
fairly good spirits, and my wife was laughing at something I had said;
the next, there were two crushed, bleeding bodies at my feet. I had a
broken arm, that was all. Well, they were killed on the instant; they
didn't suffer. That has been my one consolation.'

Yule kept the silence of sympathy.

'I was in a lunatic asylum for more than a year after that,' continued
the man. 'Unhappily, I didn't lose my senses at the moment; it took two
or three weeks to bring me to that pass. But I recovered, and there has
been no return of the disease. Don't suppose that I am still of unsound
mind. There can be little doubt that poverty will bring me to that again
in the end; but as yet I am perfectly sane. I have supported myself in
various ways.

No, I don't drink; I see the question in your face. But I am physically
weak, and, to quote Mrs Gummidge, "things go contrary with me." There's
no use lamenting; this breakfast has helped me on, and I feel in much
better spirits.'

'Your surgical knowledge is no use to you?'

The other shook his head and sighed.

'Did you ever give any special attention to diseases of the eyes?'

'Special, no. But of course I had some acquaintance with the subject.'

'Could you tell by examination whether a man was threatened with
cataract, or anything of that kind?'

'I think I could.'

'I am speaking of myself.'

The stranger made a close scrutiny of Yule's face, and asked certain
questions with reference to his visual sensations.

'I hardly like to propose it,' he said at length, 'but if you were
willing to accompany me to a very poor room that I have not far from
here, I could make the examination formally.'

'I will go with you.'

They turned away from the stall, and the ex-surgeon led into a
by-street. Yule wondered at himself for caring to seek such a singular
consultation, but he had a pressing desire to hear some opinion as to
the state of his eyes. Whatever the stranger might tell him, he would
afterwards have recourse to a man of recognised standing; but just now
companionship of any kind was welcome, and the poor hungry fellow, with
his dolorous life-story, had made appeal to his sympathies. To give
money under guise of a fee would be better than merely offering alms.

'This is the house,' said his guide, pausing at a dirty door. 'It isn't
inviting, but the people are honest, so far as I know. My room is at the
top.'

'Lead on,' answered Yule.

In the room they entered was nothing noticeable; it was only the poorest
possible kind of bed-chamber, or all but the poorest possible. Daylight
had now succeeded to dawn, yet the first thing the stranger did was to
strike a match and light a candle.

'Will you kindly place yourself with your back to the window?' he
said. 'I am going to apply what is called the catoptric test. You have
probably heard of it?'

'My ignorance of scientific matters is fathomless.'

The other smiled, and at once offered a simple explanation of the term.
By the appearance of the candle as it reflected itself in the patient's
eye it was possible, he said, to decide whether cataract had taken hold
upon the organ.

For a minute or two he conducted his experiment carefully, and Yule was
at no loss to read the result upon his face.

'How long have you suspected that something was wrong?' the surgeon
asked, as he put down the candle.

'For several months.'

'You haven't consulted anyone?'

'No one. I have kept putting it off. Just tell me what you have
discovered.'

'The back of the right lens is affected beyond a doubt.'

'That means, I take it, that before very long I shall be practically
blind?'

'I don't like to speak with an air of authority. After all, I am only a
surgeon who has bungled himself into pauperdom. You must see a competent
man; that much I can tell you in all earnestness.

Do you use your eyes much?'

'Fourteen hours a day, that's all.'

'H'm! You are a literary man, I think?'

'I am. My name is Alfred Yule.'

He had some faint hope that the name might be recognised; that would
have gone far, for the moment, to counteract his trouble. But not even
this poor satisfaction was to be granted him; to his hearer the name
evidently conveyed nothing.

'See a competent man, Mr Yule. Science has advanced rapidly since the
days when I was a student; I am only able to assure you of the existence
of disease.'

They talked for half an hour, until both were shaking with cold. Then
Yule thrust his hand into his pocket.

'You will of course allow me to offer such return as I am able,' he
said. 'The information isn't pleasant, but I am glad to have it.'

He laid five shillings on the chest of drawers--there was no table. The
stranger expressed his gratitude.

'My name is Duke,' he said, 'and I was christened Victor--possibly
because I was doomed to defeat in life. I wish you could have associated
the memory of me with happier circumstances.'

They shook hands, and Yule quitted the house.

He came out again by Camden Town station. The coffee-stall had
disappeared; the traffic of the great highway was growing uproarious.
Among all the strugglers for existence who rushed this way and that,
Alfred Yule felt himself a man chosen for fate's heaviest infliction. He
never questioned the accuracy of the stranger's judgment, and he hoped
for no mitigation of the doom it threatened. His life was over--and
wasted.

He might as well go home, and take his place meekly by the fireside.
He was beaten. Soon to be a useless old man, a burden and annoyance to
whosoever had pity on him.

It was a curious effect of the imagination that since coming into the
open air again his eyesight seemed to be far worse than before. He
irritated his nerves of vision by incessant tests, closing first one eye
then the other, comparing his view of nearer objects with the appearance
of others more remote, fancying an occasional pain--which could have had
no connection with his disease. The literary projects which had stirred
so actively in his mind twelve hours ago were become an insubstantial
memory; to the one crushing blow had succeeded a second, which was
fatal. He could hardly recall what special piece of work he had been
engaged upon last night. His thoughts were such as if actual blindness
had really fallen upon him.

At half-past eight he entered the house. Mrs Yule was standing at the
