foot of the stairs; she looked at him, then turned away towards the
kitchen. He went upstairs. On coming down again he found breakfast ready
as usual, and seated himself at the table. Two letters waited for him
there; he opened them.

When Mrs Yule came into the room a few moments later she was astonished
by a burst of loud, mocking laughter from her husband, excited, as it
appeared, by something he was reading.

'Is Marian up?' he asked, turning to her.

'Yes.'

'She is not coming to breakfast?'

'No.'

'Then just take that letter to her, and ask her to read it.'

Mrs Yule ascended to her daughter's bedroom. She knocked, was bidden
enter, and found Marian packing clothes in a trunk. The girl looked as
if she had been up all night; her eyes bore the traces of much weeping.

'He has come back, dear,' said Mrs Yule, in the low voice of
apprehension, 'and he says you are to read this letter.'

Marian took the sheet, unfolded it, and read. As soon as she had reached
the end she looked wildly at her mother, seemed to endeavour vainly to
speak, then fell to the floor in unconsciousness. The mother was only
just able to break the violence of her fall. Having snatched a pillow
and placed it beneath Marian's head, she rushed to the door and called
loudly for her husband, who in a moment appeared.

'What is it?' she cried to him. 'Look, she has fallen down in a faint.
Why are you treating her like this?'

'Attend to her,' Yule replied roughly. 'I suppose you know better than I
do what to do when a person faints.'

The swoon lasted for several minutes.

'What's in the letter?' asked Mrs Yule whilst chafing the lifeless
hands.

'Her money's lost. The people who were to pay it have just failed.'

'She won't get anything?'

'Most likely nothing at all.'

The letter was a private communication from one of John Yule's
executors. It seemed likely that the demand upon Turberville & Co. for
an account of the deceased partner's share in their business had helped
to bring about a crisis in affairs that were already unstable. Something
might be recovered in the legal proceedings that would result, but there
were circumstances which made the outlook very doubtful.

As Marian came to herself her father left the room. An hour afterwards
Mrs Yule summoned him again to the girl's chamber; he went, and found
Marian lying on the bed, looking like one who had been long ill.

'I wish to ask you a few questions,' she said, without raising herself.
'Must my legacy necessarily be paid out of that investment?'

'It must. Those are the terms of the will.'

'If nothing can be recovered from those people, I have no remedy?'

'None whatever that I can see.'

'But when a firm is bankrupt they generally pay some portion of their
debts?'

'Sometimes. I know nothing of the case.'

'This of course happens to me,' Marian said, with intense bitterness.
'None of the other legatees will suffer, I suppose?'

'Someone must, but to a very small extent.'

'Of course. When shall I have direct information?'

'You can write to Mr Holden; you have his address.'

'Thank you. That's all.'

He was dismissed, and went quietly away.




PART FIVE



CHAPTER XXX. WAITING ON DESTINY

Throughout the day Marian kept her room. Her intention to leave the
house was, of course, abandoned; she was the prisoner of fate. Mrs Yule
would have tended her with unremitting devotion, but the girl desired to
be alone. At times she lay in silent anguish; frequently her tears broke
forth, and she sobbed until weariness overcame her. In the afternoon she
wrote a letter to Mr Holden, begging that she might be kept constantly
acquainted with the progress of things.

At five her mother brought tea.

'Wouldn't it be better if you went to bed now, Marian?' she suggested.

'To bed? But I am going out in an hour or two.'

'Oh, you can't, dear! It's so bitterly cold. It wouldn't be good for
you.'

'I have to go out, mother, so we won't speak of it.'

It was not safe to reply. Mrs Yule sat down, and watched the girl raise
the cup to her mouth with trembling hand.

'This won't make any difference to you--in the end, my darling,' the
mother ventured to say at length, alluding for the first time to the
effect of the catastrophe on Marian's immediate prospects.

'Of course not,' was the reply, in a tone of self-persuasion.

'Mr Milvain is sure to have plenty of money before long.'

'Yes.'

'You feel much better now, don't you?'

'Much. I am quite well again.'

At seven, Marian went out. Finding herself weaker than she had thought,
she stopped an empty cab that presently passed her, and so drove to
the Milvains' lodgings. In her agitation she inquired for Mr Milvain,
instead of for Dora, as was her habit; it mattered very little, for
the landlady and her servants were of course under no misconception
regarding this young lady's visits.

Jasper was at home, and working. He had but to look at Marian to see
that something wretched had been going on at her home; naturally he
supposed it the result of his letter to Mr Yule.

'Your father has been behaving brutally,' he said, holding her hands and
gazing anxiously at her.

'There is something far worse than that, Jasper.'

'Worse?'

She threw off her outdoor things, then took the fatal letter from her
pocket and handed it to him. Jasper gave a whistle of consternation, and
looked vacantly from the paper to Marian's countenance.

'How the deuce comes this about?' he exclaimed. 'Why, wasn't your uncle
aware of the state of things?'

'Perhaps he was. He may have known that the legacy was a mere form.'

'You are the only one affected?'

'So father says. It's sure to be the case.'

'This has upset you horribly, I can see. Sit down, Marian. When did the
letter come?'

'This morning.'

'And you have been fretting over it all day. But come, we must keep up
our courage; you may get something substantial out of the scoundrels
still.'

Even whilst he spoke his eyes wandered absently. On the last word his
voice failed, and he fell into abstraction. Marian's look was fixed upon
him, and he became conscious of it. He tried to smile.

'What were you writing?' she asked, making involuntary diversion from
the calamitous theme.

'Rubbish for the Will-o'-the-Wisp. Listen to this paragraph about
English concert audiences.'

It was as necessary to him as to her to have a respite before the graver
discussion began. He seized gladly the opportunity she offered, and read
several pages of manuscript, slipping from one topic to another. To hear
him one would have supposed that he was in his ordinary mood; he laughed
at his own jokes and points.

'They'll have to pay me more,' was the remark with which he closed. 'I
only wanted to make myself indispensable to them, and at the end of
this year I shall feel pretty sure of that. They'll have to give me two
guineas a column; by Jove! they will.'

'And you may hope for much more than that, mayn't you, before long?'

'Oh, I shall transfer myself to a better paper presently. It seems to me
I must be stirring to some purpose.'

He gave her a significant look.

'What shall we do, Jasper?'

'Work and wait, I suppose.'

'There's something I must tell you. Father said I had better sign that
Harrington article myself. If I do that, I shall have a right to the
money, I think. It will at least be eight guineas. And why shouldn't I
go on writing for myself--for us? You can help me to think of subjects.'

'First of all, what about my letter to your father? We are forgetting
all about it.'

'He refused to answer.'

Marian avoided closer description of what had happened. It was partly
that she felt ashamed of her father's unreasoning wrath, and feared
lest Jasper's pride might receive an injury from which she in turn
would suffer; partly that she was unwilling to pain her lover by making
display of all she had undergone.

'Oh, he refused to reply! Surely that is extreme behaviour.'

What she dreaded seemed to be coming to pass. Jasper stood rather
stiffly, and threw his head back.

'You know the reason, dear. That prejudice has entered into his very
life. It is not you he dislikes; that is impossible. He thinks of you
only as he would of anyone connected with Mr Fadge.'

'Well, well; it isn't a matter of much moment. But what I have in mind
is this. Will it be possible for you, whilst living at home, to take a
position of independence, and say that you are going to work for your
own profit?'

'At least I might claim half the money I can earn. And I was thinking
more of--'

'Of what?'

'When I am your wife, I may be able to help. I could earn thirty or
forty pounds a year, I think. That would pay the rent of a small house.'

She spoke with shaken voice, her eyes fixed upon his face.

'But, my dear Marian, we surely oughtn't to think of marrying so long as
expenses are so nicely fitted as all that?'

'No. I only meant--'

She faltered, and her tongue became silent as her heart sank.

'It simply means,' pursued Jasper, seating himself and crossing his
legs, 'that I must move heaven and earth to improve my position. You
know that my faith in myself is not small; there's no knowing what I
might do if I used every effort. But, upon my word, I don't see much
hope of our being able to marry for a year or two under the most
favourable circumstances.'

'No; I quite understand that.'

'Can you promise to keep a little love for me all that time?' he asked
with a constrained smile.

'You know me too well to fear.'

'I thought you seemed a little doubtful.'

His tone was not altogether that which makes banter pleasant between
lovers. Marian looked at him fearfully. Was it possible for him in truth
so to misunderstand her? He had never satisfied her heart's desire of
infinite love; she never spoke with him but she was oppressed with the
suspicion that his love was not as great as hers, and, worse still, that
he did not wholly comprehend the self-surrender which she strove to make
plain in every word.

'You don't say that seriously, Jasper?'

'But answer seriously.'

'How can you doubt that I would wait faithfully for you for years if it
were necessary?'

'It mustn't be years, that's very certain. I think it preposterous for a
man to hold a woman bound in that hopeless way.'

'But what question is there of holding me bound? Is love dependent on
fixed engagements? Do you feel that, if we agreed to part, your love
would be at once a thing of the past?'

'Why no, of course not.'

'Oh, but how coldly you speak, Jasper!'

She could not breathe a word which might be interpreted as fear lest
the change of her circumstances should make a change in his feeling.
Yet that was in her mind. The existence of such a fear meant, of
course, that she did not entirely trust him, and viewed his character as
something less than noble. Very seldom indeed is a woman free from such
doubts, however absolute her love; and perhaps it is just as rare for
a man to credit in his heart all the praises he speaks of his beloved.
Passion is compatible with a great many of these imperfections of
intellectual esteem. To see more clearly into Jasper's personality was,
for Marian, to suffer the more intolerable dread lest she should lose
him.

She went to his side. Her heart ached because, in her great misery, he
had not fondled her, and intoxicated her senses with loving words.

'How can I make you feel how much I love you?' she murmured.

'You mustn't be so literal, dearest. Women are so desperately
matter-of-fact; it comes out even in their love-talk.'

Marian was not without perception of the irony of such an opinion on
Jasper's lips.

'I am content for you to think so,' she said. 'There is only one fact in
my life of any importance, and I can never lose sight of it.'

'Well now, we are quite sure of each other. Tell me plainly, do you
think me capable of forsaking you because you have perhaps lost your
money?'

The question made her wince. If delicacy had held her tongue, it had no
control of HIS.

'How can I answer that better,' she said, 'than by saying I love you?'

It was no answer, and Jasper, though obtuse compared with her,
understood that it was none. But the emotion which had prompted his
words was genuine enough. Her touch, the perfume of her passion, had
their exalting effect upon him. He felt in all sincerity that to forsake
her would be a baseness, revenged by the loss of such a wife.

'There's an uphill fight before me, that's all,' he said, 'instead of
the pretty smooth course I have been looking forward to. But I don't
fear it, Marian. I'm not the fellow to be beaten.

You shall be my wife, and you shall have as many luxuries as if you had
brought me a fortune.'

'Luxuries! Oh, how childish you seem to think me!'

'Not a bit of it. Luxuries are a most important part of life. I had
rather not live at all than never possess them. Let me give you a useful
hint; if ever I seem to you to flag, just remind me of the difference
between these lodgings and a richly furnished house. Just hint to me
that So-and-so, the journalist, goes about in his carriage, and can give
his wife a box at the theatre. Just ask me, casually, how I should
like to run over to the Riviera when London fogs are thickest. You
understand? That's the way to keep me at it like a steam-engine.'

'You are right. All those things enable one to live a better and fuller
life. Oh, how cruel that I--that we are robbed in this way! You can have
no idea how terrible a blow it was to me when I read that letter this
morning.'

She was on the point of confessing that she had swooned, but something
restrained her.

'Your father can hardly be sorry,' said Jasper.

'I think he speaks more harshly than he feels. The worst was, that until
he got your letter he had kept hoping that I would let him have the
money for a new review.'

'Well, for the present I prefer to believe that the money isn't all
lost. If the blackguards pay ten shillings in the pound you will get two
thousand five hundred out of them, and that's something. But how do you
stand? Will your position be that of an ordinary creditor?'

'I am so ignorant. I know nothing of such things.'

'But of course your interests will be properly looked after. Put
yourself in communication with this Mr Holden. I'll have a look into the
law on the subject. Let us hope as long as we can. By Jove! There's no
other way of facing it.'

'No, indeed.'

'Mrs Reardon and the rest of them are safe enough, I suppose?'

'Oh, no doubt.'

'Confound them!--It grows upon one. One doesn't take in the whole of
such a misfortune at once. We must hold on to the last rag of hope, and
in the meantime I'll half work myself to death. Are you going to see the
girls?'

'Not to-night. You must tell them.'

'Dora will cry her eyes out. Upon my word, Maud'll have to draw in her
horns. I must frighten her into economy and hard work.'

He again lost himself in anxious reverie.

'Marian, couldn't you try your hand at fiction?'

She started, remembering that her father had put the same question so
recently.

'I'm afraid I could do nothing worth doing.'

'That isn't exactly the question. Could you do anything that would sell?
With very moderate success in fiction you might make three times as much
as you ever will by magazine pot-boilers. A girl like you. Oh, you might
manage, I should think.'

'A girl like me?'

'Well, I mean that love-scenes, and that kind of thing, would be very
much in your line.'Marian was not given to blushing; very few girls are,
even on strong provocation. For the first time Jasper saw her cheeks
colour deeply, and it was with anything but pleasure. His words were
coarsely inconsiderate, and wounded her.

'I think that is not my work,' she said coldly, looking away.

'But surely there's no harm in my saying--' he paused in astonishment.
'I meant nothing that could offend you.'

'I know you didn't, Jasper. But you make me think that--'

'Don't be so literal again, my dear girl. Come here and forgive me.'

She did not approach, but only because the painful thought he had
excited kept her to that spot.

'Come, Marian! Then I must come to you.'

He did so and held her in his arms.

'Try your hand at a novel, dear, if you can possibly make time. Put me
in it, if you like, and make me an insensible masculine. The experiment
is worth a try I'm certain. At all events do a few chapters, and let
me see them. A chapter needn't take you more than a couple of hours I
should think.'

Marian refrained from giving any promise. She seemed irresponsive to
his caresses. That thought which at times gives trouble to all women of
strong emotions was working in her: had she been too demonstrative, and
made her love too cheap? Now that Jasper's love might be endangered, it
behoved her to use any arts which nature prompted. And so, for once, he
was not wholly satisfied with her, and at their parting he wondered what
subtle change had affected her manner to him.

'Why didn't Marian come to speak a word?' said Dora, when her brother
entered the girls' sitting-room about ten o'clock.

'You knew she was with me, then?'

'We heard her voice as she was going away.'

'She brought me some enspiriting news, and thought it better I should
have the reporting of it to you.'

With brevity he made known what had befallen.

'Cheerful, isn't it? The kind of thing that strengthens one's trust in
Providence.'

The girls were appalled. Maud, who was reading by the fireside, let her
book fall to her lap, and knit her brows darkly.

'Then your marriage must be put off, of course?' said Dora.

'Well, I shouldn't be surprised if that were found necessary,' replied
her brother caustically. He was able now to give vent to the feeling
which in Marian's presence was suppressed, partly out of consideration
for her, and partly owing to her influence.

'And shall we have to go back to our old lodgings again?' inquired Maud.

Jasper gave no answer, but kicked a footstool savagely out of his way
and paced the room.

'Oh, do you think we need?' said Dora, with unusual protest against
economy.

'Remember that it's a matter for your own consideration,' Jasper replied
at length. 'You are living on your own resources, you know.'

Maud glanced at her sister, but Dora was preoccupied.

'Why do you prefer to stay here?' Jasper asked abruptly of the younger
girl.

'It is so very much nicer,' she replied with some embarrassment.

He bit the ends of his moustache, and his eyes glared at the impalpable
thwarting force that to imagination seemed to fill the air about him.

'A lesson against being over-hasty,' he muttered, again kicking the
footstool.

'Did you make that considerate remark to Marian?' asked Maud.

'There would have been no harm if I had done. She knows that I shouldn't
have been such an ass as to talk of marriage without the prospect of
something to live upon.'

'I suppose she's wretched?' said Dora.

'What else can you expect?'

'And did you propose to release her from the burden of her engagement?'
Maud inquired.

'It's a confounded pity that you're not rich, Maud,' replied her brother
with an involuntary laugh. 'You would have a brilliant reputation for
wit.'

He walked about and ejaculated splenetic phrases on the subject of his
ill-luck.

'We are here, and here we must stay,' was the final expression of his
mood. 'I have only one superstition that I know of and that forbids me
to take a step backward. If I went into poorer lodgings again I should
feel it was inviting defeat. I shall stay as long as the position is
tenable. Let us get on to Christmas, and then see how things look.
Heavens! Suppose we had married, and after that lost the money!'

'You would have been no worse off than plenty of literary men,' said
Dora.

'Perhaps not. But as I have made up my mind to be considerably better
off than most literary men that reflection wouldn't console me much.
Things are in statu quo, that's all. I have to rely upon my own efforts.
What's the time? Half-past ten; I can get two hours' work before going
to bed.'

And nodding a good-night he left them.

When Marian entered the house and went upstairs, she was followed by her
mother. On Mrs Yule's countenance there was a new distress, she had been
crying recently.

'Have you seen him?' the mother asked.

'Yes. We have talked about it.'

'What does he wish you to do, dear?'

'There's nothing to be done except wait.'

'Father has been telling me something, Marian,' said Mrs Yule after a
long silence. 'He says he is going to be blind. There's something
the matter with his eyes, and he went to see someone about it this
afternoon. He'll get worse and worse, until there has been an operation;
and perhaps he'll never be able to use his eyes properly again.'

The girl listened in an attitude of despair.

'He has seen an oculist?--a really good doctor?'

'He says he went to one of the best.'

'And how did he speak to you?'

'He doesn't seem to care much what happens. He talked of going to the
workhouse, and things like that. But it couldn't ever come to that,
could it, Marian? Wouldn't somebody help him?'

'There's not much help to be expected in this world,' answered the girl.

Physical weariness brought her a few hours of oblivion as soon as she
had lain down, but her sleep came to an end in the early morning, when
the pressure of evil dreams forced her back to consciousness of real
sorrows and cares. A fog-veiled sky added its weight to crush her
spirit; at the hour when she usually rose it was still all but as dark
as midnight. Her mother's voice at the door begged her to lie and
rest until it grew lighter, and she willingly complied, feeling indeed
scarcely capable of leaving her bed.

The thick black fog penetrated every corner of the house. It could be
smelt and tasted. Such an atmosphere produces low-spirited languor even
in the vigorous and hopeful; to those wasted by suffering it is the very
reek of the bottomless pit, poisoning the soul. Her face colourless as
the pillow, Marian lay neither sleeping nor awake, in blank extremity of
woe; tears now and then ran down her cheeks, and at times her body was
shaken with a throe such as might result from anguish of the torture
chamber.

Midway in the morning, when it was still necessary to use artificial
light, she went down to the sitting-room. The course of household life
had been thrown into confusion by the disasters of the last day or two;
Mrs Yule, who occupied herself almost exclusively with questions of
economy, cleanliness, and routine, had not the heart to pursue her round
of duties, and this morning, though under normal circumstances she would
have been busy in 'turning out' the dining-room, she moved aimlessly and
despondently about the house, giving the servant contradictory orders
and then blaming herself for her absent-mindedness. In the troubles of
her husband and her daughter she had scarcely greater share--so far
as active participation went--than if she had been only a faithful old
housekeeper; she could only grieve and lament that such discord had come
between the two whom she loved, and that in herself was no power even to
solace their distresses. Marian found her standing in the passage, with
a duster in one hand and a hearth-brush in the other.

'Your father has asked to see you when you come down,' Mrs Yule
whispered.

'I'll go to him.'

Marian entered the study. Her father was not in his place at the
writing-table, nor yet seated in the chair which he used when he had
leisure to draw up to the fireside; he sat in front of one of the
bookcases, bent forward as if seeking a volume, but his chin was propped
upon his hand, and he had maintained this position for a long time. He
did not immediately move. When he raised his head Marian saw that he
looked older, and she noticed--or fancied she did--that there was some
unfamiliar peculiarity about his eyes.

'I am obliged to you for coming,' he began with distant formality.
'Since I saw you last I have learnt something which makes a change in my
position and prospects, and it is necessary to speak on the subject. I
won't detain you more than a few minutes.'

He coughed, and seemed to consider his next words.

'Perhaps I needn't repeat what I have told your mother. You have learnt
it from her, I dare say.'

'Yes, with much grief.'

'Thank you, but we will leave aside that aspect of the matter. For a few
more months I may be able to pursue my ordinary work, but before long
I shall certainly be disabled from earning my livelihood by literature.
Whether this will in any way affect your own position I don't know. Will
you have the goodness to tell me whether you still purpose leaving this
house?'

'I have no means of doing so.'

'Is there any likelihood of your marriage taking place, let us say,
within four months?'

'Only if the executors recover my money, or a large portion of it.'

'I understand. My reason for asking is this. My lease of this house
terminates at the end of next March, and I shall certainly not be
justified in renewing it. If you are able to provide for yourself in
any way it will be sufficient for me to rent two rooms after that. This
disease which affects my eyes may be only temporary; in due time an
operation may render it possible for me to work again. In hope of that I
shall probably have to borrow a sum of money on the security of my life
insurance, though in the first instance I shall make the most of what I
can get for the furniture of the house and a large part of my library;
your mother and I could live at very slight expense in lodgings. If the
disease prove irremediable, I must prepare myself for the worst. What
I wish to say is, that it will be better if from to-day you consider
yourself as working for your own subsistence. So long as I remain here
this house is of course your home; there can be no question between us
of trivial expenses. But it is right that you should understand what my
prospects are. I shall soon have no home to offer you; you must look to
your own efforts for support.'

'I am prepared to do that, father.'

'I think you will have no great difficulty in earning enough for
yourself. I have done my best to train you in writing for the
periodicals, and your natural abilities are considerable. If you
marry, I wish you a happy life. The end of mine, of many long years of
unremitting toil, is failure and destitution.'

Marian sobbed.

'That's all I had to say,' concluded her father, his voice tremulous
with self-compassion. 'I will only beg that there may be no further
profitless discussion between us. This room is open to you, as always,
and I see no reason why we should not converse on subjects disconnected
with our personal differences.'

'Is there no remedy for cataract in its early stages?' asked Marian.

'None. You can read up the subject for yourself at the British Museum. I
prefer not to speak of it.'

'Will you let me be what help to you I can?'

'For the present the best you can do is to establish a connection for
yourself with editors. Your name will be an assistance to you. My advice
is, that you send your "Harrington" article forthwith to Trenchard,
writing him a note. If you desire my help in the suggestion of new
subjects, I will do my best to be of use.'

Marian withdrew. She went to the sitting-room, where an ochreous
daylight was beginning to diffuse itself and to render the lamp
superfluous. With the dissipation of the fog rain had set in; its
splashing upon the muddy pavement was audible.

Mrs Yule, still with a duster in her hand, sat on the sofa. Marian took
a place beside her. They talked in low, broken tones, and wept together
over their miseries.



CHAPTER XXXI. A RESCUE AND A SUMMONS

The chances are that you have neither understanding nor sympathy for men
such as Edwin Reardon and Harold Biffen. They merely provoke you.
They seem to you inert, flabby, weakly envious, foolishly obstinate,
impiously mutinous, and many other things. You are made angrily
contemptuous by their failure to get on; why don't they bestir
themselves, push and bustle, welcome kicks so long as halfpence follow,
make place in the world's eye--in short, take a leaf from the book of Mr
Jasper Milvain?

But try to imagine a personality wholly unfitted for the rough and
tumble of the world's labour-market. From the familiar point of view
these men were worthless; view them in possible relation to a humane
order of Society, and they are admirable citizens. Nothing is easier
than to condemn a type of character which is unequal to the coarse
demands of life as it suits the average man. These two were richly
endowed with the kindly and the imaginative virtues; if fate threw them
amid incongruous circumstances, is their endowment of less value? You
scorn their passivity; but it was their nature and their merit to be
passive.

Gifted with independent means, each of them would have taken quite
a different aspect in your eyes. The sum of their faults was their
inability to earn money; but, indeed, that inability does not call for
unmingled disdain.

It was very weak of Harold Biffen to come so near perishing of hunger as
he did in the days when he was completing his novel. But he would have
vastly preferred to eat and be satisfied had any method of obtaining
food presented itself to him. He did not starve for the pleasure of the
thing, I assure you. Pupils were difficult to get just now, and writing
that he had sent to magazines had returned upon his hands. He pawned
such of his possessions as he could spare, and he reduced his meals to
the minimum. Nor was he uncheerful in his cold garret and with his empty
stomach, for 'Mr Bailey, Grocer,' drew steadily to an end.

He worked very slowly. The book would make perhaps two volumes of
ordinary novel size, but he had laboured over it for many months,
patiently, affectionately, scrupulously. Each sentence was as good as
he could make it, harmonious to the ear, with words of precious meaning
skilfully set. Before sitting down to a chapter he planned it minutely
in his mind; then he wrote a rough draft of it; then he elaborated the
thing phrase by phrase. He had no thought of whether such toil would be
recompensed in coin of the realm; nay, it was his conviction that, if
with difficulty published, it could scarcely bring him money. The work
must be significant, that was all he cared for. And he had no society of
admiring friends to encourage him. Reardon understood the merit of the
workmanship, but frankly owned that the book was repulsive to him.
To the public it would be worse than repulsive--tedious, utterly
uninteresting. No matter; it drew to its end.

The day of its completion was made memorable by an event decidedly more
exciting, even to the author.

At eight o'clock in the evening there remained half a page to be
written. Biffen had already worked about nine hours, and on breaking
off to appease his hunger he doubted whether to finish to-night or to
postpone the last lines till tomorrow. The discovery that only a small
crust of bread lay in the cupboard decided him to write no more; he
would have to go out to purchase a loaf and that was disturbance.

But stay; had he enough money? He searched his pockets. Two pence and
two farthings; no more.

You are probably not aware that at bakers' shops in the poor quarters
the price of the half-quartern loaf varies sometimes from week to week.
At present, as Biffen knew, it was twopence three-farthings, a
common figure. But Harold did not possess three farthings, only two.
Reflecting, he remembered to have passed yesterday a shop where the
bread was marked twopence halfpenny; it was a shop in a very obscure
little street off Hampstead Road, some distance from Clipstone Street.
Thither he must repair. He had only his hat and a muffler to put on, for
again he was wearing his overcoat in default of the under one, and his
ragged umbrella to take from the corner; so he went forth.

To his delight the twopence halfpenny announcement was still in the
baker's window. He obtained a loaf wrapped it in the piece of paper he
had brought--small bakers decline to supply paper for this purpose--and
strode joyously homeward again.

Having eaten, he looked longingly at his manuscript. But half a page
more. Should he not finish it to-night? The temptation was irresistible.
He sat down, wrought with unusual speed, and at half-past ten wrote with
magnificent flourish 'The End.'

His fire was out and he had neither coals nor wood. But his feet were
frozen into lifelessness. Impossible to go to bed like this; he must
take another turn in the streets. It would suit his humour to ramble a
while. Had it not been so late he would have gone to see Reardon, who
expected the communication of this glorious news.

So again he locked his door. Half-way downstairs he stumbled over
something or somebody in the dark.

'Who is that?' he cried.

The answer was a loud snore. Biffen went to the bottom of the house and
called to the landlady.

'Mrs Willoughby! Who is asleep on the stairs?'

'Why, I 'spect it's Mr Briggs,' replied the woman, indulgently. 'Don't
you mind him, Mr Biffen. There's no 'arm: he's only had a little too
much. I'll go up an' make him go to bed as soon as I've got my 'ands
clean.'

'The necessity for waiting till then isn't obvious,' remarked the
realist with a chuckle, and went his way.

He walked at a sharp pace for more than an hour, and about midnight drew
near to his own quarter again. He had just turned up by the Middlesex
Hospital, and was at no great distance from Clipstone Street, when a
yell and scamper caught his attention; a group of loafing blackguards on
the opposite side of the way had suddenly broken up, and as they rushed
off he heard the word 'Fire!' This was too common an occurrence to
disturb his equanimity; he wondered absently in which street the fire
might be, but trudged on without a thought of making investigation.
Repeated yells and rushes, however, assailed his apathy. Two women came
tearing by him, and he shouted to them: 'Where is it?'

'In Clipstone Street, they say,' one screamed back.

He could no longer be unconcerned. If in his own street the
conflagration might be in the very house he inhabited, and in that
case---- He set off at a run. Ahead of him was a thickening throng, its
position indicating the entrance to Clipstone Street. Soon he found his
progress retarded; he had to dodge this way and that, to force progress,
to guard himself against overthrows by the torrent of ruffiandom which
always breaks forth at the cry of fire. He could now smell the smoke,
and all at once a black volume of it, bursting from upper windows,
alarmed his sight. At once he was aware that, if not his own dwelling,
it must be one of those on either side that was in flames. As yet no
engine had arrived, and straggling policemen were only just beginning to
make their way to the scene of uproar. By dint of violent effort Biffen
moved forward yard by yard. A tongue of flame which suddenly illumined
the fronts of the houses put an end to his doubt.

'Let me get past!' he shouted to the gaping and swaying mass of people
in front of him. 'I live there! I must go upstairs to save something!'

His educated accent moved attention. Repeating the demand again and
again he succeeded in getting forward, and at length was near enough
to see that people were dragging articles of furniture out on to the
pavement.

'That you, Mr Biffen?' cried someone to him.

He recognised the face of a fellow-lodger.

'Is it possible to get up to my room?' broke frantically from his lips.

'You'll never get up there. It's that--Briggs'--the epithet was
alliterative--''as upset his lamp, and I 'ope he'll--well get roasted to
death.'

Biffen leaped on to the threshold, and crashed against Mrs Willoughby,
the landlady, who was carrying a huge bundle of household linen.

'I told you to look after that drunken brute;' he said to her. 'Can I
get upstairs?'

'What do I care whether you can or not!' the woman shrieked. 'My God!
And all them new chairs as I bought--!'

He heard no more, but bounded over a confusion of obstacles, and in a
moment was on the landing of the first storey. Here he encountered a
man who had not lost his head, a stalwart mechanic engaged in slipping
clothes on to two little children.

'If somebody don't drag that fellow Briggs down he'll be dead,' observed
the man. 'He's layin' outside his door. I pulled him out, but I can't do
no more for him.'

Smoke grew thick on the staircase. Burning was as yet confined to that
front room on the second floor tenanted by Briggs the disastrous, but
in all likelihood the ceiling was ablaze, and if so it would be all but
impossible for Biffen to gain his own chamber, which was at the back on
the floor above. No one was making an attempt to extinguish the fire;
personal safety and the rescue of their possessions alone occupied the
thoughts of such people as were still in the house. Desperate with the
dread of losing his manuscript, his toil, his one hope, the realist
scarcely stayed to listen to a warning that the fumes were impassable;
with head bent he rushed up to the next landing. There lay Briggs,
perchance already stifled, and through the open door Biffen had a
horrible vision of furnace fury. To go yet higher would have been
madness but for one encouragement: he knew that on his own storey was a
ladder giving access to a trap-door, by which he might issue on to the
roof, whence escape to the adjacent houses would be practicable. Again a
leap forward!

In fact, not two minutes elapsed from his commencing the ascent of the
stairs to the moment when, all but fainting, he thrust the key into his
door and fell forward into purer air. Fell, for he was on his knees, and
had begun to suffer from a sense of failing power, a sick whirling of
the brain, a terror of hideous death. His manuscript was on the table,
where he had left it after regarding and handling it with joyful
self-congratulation; though it was pitch dark in the room, he could at
once lay his hand on the heap of paper. Now he had it; now it was jammed
tight under his left arm; now he was out again on the landing, in smoke
more deadly than ever.

He said to himself: 'If I cannot instantly break out by the trap-door
it's all over with me.' That the exit would open to a vigorous thrust
he knew, having amused himself not long ago by going on to the roof. He
touched the ladder, sprang upwards, and felt the trap above him. But he
could not push it back. 'I'm a dead man,' flashed across his mind, 'and
all for the sake of "Mr Bailey, Grocer."' A frenzied effort, the last of
which his muscles were capable, and the door yielded. His head was now
through the aperture, and though the smoke swept up about him, that gasp
of cold air gave him strength to throw himself on the flat portion of
the roof that he had reached.

So for a minute or two he lay. Then he was able to stand, to survey
his position, and to walk along by the parapet. He looked down upon the
surging and shouting crowd in Clipstone Street, but could see it only at
intervals, owing to the smoke that rolled from the front windows below
him.

What he had now to do he understood perfectly. This roof was divided
from those on either hand by a stack of chimneys; to get round the end
of these stacks was impossible, or at all events too dangerous a feat
unless it were the last resource, but by climbing to the apex of the
slates he would be able to reach the chimney-pots, to drag himself up
to them, and somehow to tumble over on to the safer side. To this
undertaking he forthwith addressed himself. Without difficulty he
reached the ridge; standing on it he found that only by stretching his
arm to the utmost could he grip the top of a chimney-pot. Had he the
strength necessary to raise himself by such a hold? And suppose the pot
broke?

His life was still in danger; the increasing volumes of smoke warned him
that in a few minutes the uppermost storey might be in flames. He
took off his overcoat to allow himself more freedom of action; the
manuscript, now an encumbrance, must precede him over the chimney-stack,
and there was only one way of effecting that. With care he stowed
the papers into the pockets of the coat; then he rolled the garment
together, tied it up in its own sleeves, took a deliberate aim--and the
bundle was for the present in safety.

Now for the gymnastic endeavour. Standing on tiptoe, he clutched the
rim of the chimney-pot, and strove to raise himself. The hold was firm
enough, but his arms were far too puny to perform such work, even
when death would be the penalty of failure. Too long he had lived on
insufficient food and sat over the debilitating desk. He swung this way
and that, trying to throw one of his knees as high as the top of the
brickwork, but there was no chance of his succeeding. Dropping on to the
slates, he sat there in perturbation.

He must cry for help. In front it was scarcely possible to stand by the
parapet, owing to the black clouds of smoke, now mingled with sparks;
perchance he might attract the notice of some person either in the yards
behind or at the back windows of other houses. The night was so obscure
that he could not hope to be seen; voice alone must be depended upon,
and there was no certainty that it would be heard far enough. Though he
stood in his shirt-sleeves in a bitter wind no sense of cold affected
him; his face was beaded with perspiration drawn forth by his futile
struggle to climb. He let himself slide down the rear slope, and,
holding by the end of the chimney brickwork, looked into the yards. At
the same instant a face appeared to him--that of a man who was trying to
obtain a glimpse of this roof from that of the next house by thrusting
out his head beyond the block of chimneys.

'Hollo!' cried the stranger. 'What are you doing there?'

'Trying to escape, of course. Help me to get on to your roof.'

'By God! I expected to see the fire coming through already. Are you
the--as upset his lamp an' fired the bloomin' 'ouse?'

'Not I! He's lying drunk on the stairs; dead by this time.'

'By God! I wouldn't have helped you if you'd been him. How are you
coming round? Blest if I see! You'll break your bloomin' neck if you try
this corner. You'll have to come over the chimneys; wait till I get a
ladder.'

'And a rope,' shouted Biffen.

The man disappeared for five minutes. To Biffen it seemed half an hour;
he felt, or imagined he felt, the slates getting hot beneath him, and
the smoke was again catching his breath. But at length there was a shout
from the top of the chimney-stack. The rescuer had seated himself on one
of the pots, and was about to lower on Biffen's side a ladder which had
enabled him to ascend from the other. Biffen planted the lowest rung
very carefully on the ridge of the roof, climbed as lightly as possible,
got a footing between two pots; the ladder was then pulled over, and
both men descended in safety.

'Have you seen a coat lying about here?' was Biffen's first question. 'I
threw mine over.'

'What did you do that for?'

'There are some valuable papers in the pockets.'

They searched in vain; on neither side of the roof was the coat
discoverable.

'You must have pitched it into the street,' said the man.

This was a terrible blow; Biffen forgot his rescue from destruction
