would he proceed if she gave him details of Jane's history, admitting
that she was the child of Joseph James Snowdon? What, again, had he
been told by the people of whom he had made inquiries? She needed time
to review her position.

'As I was sayin',' she resumed, poking the fire, 'I've been a mother to
her these six years or more, an' I feel I done the right thing by her.
She was left on my 'ands by them as promised to pay for her keep; an' a
few months, I may say a few weeks, was all as ever I got. Another woman
would a sent the child to the 'Ouse; but that's always the way with me;
I'm always actin' against my own interesses.'

'You say that her parents went away and left her?' asked the old man,
knitting his brows.

'Her father did. Her mother, she died in this very 'ouse, an' she was
buried from it. He gave her a respectable burial, I'll say that much
for him. An' I shouldn't have allowed anything but one as was
respectable to leave this 'ouse; I'd sooner a paid money out o' my own
pocket. That's always the way with me. Mr. Willis, he's my undertaker;
you'll find him at Number 17 Green Passage. He buried my 'usband; though
that wasn't from the Close; but I never knew a job turned out more
respectable. He was 'ere to-day; we've only just buried my 'usband's
mother. That's why I ain't quite myself--see?'

Mrs. Peckover was not wont to be gossippy. She became so at present,
partly in consequence of the stimulants she had taken to support her
through a trying ceremony, partly as a means of obtaining time to
reflect. Jane's unlucky illness made an especial difficulty in her
calculations. She felt that the longer she delayed mention of the fact,
the more likely was she to excite suspicion; on the other hand, she
could not devise the suitable terms in which to reveal it. The steady
gaze of the old man was disconcerting. Not that he searched her face
with a cunning scrutiny, such as her own eyes expressed; she would have
found that less troublesome, as being familiar. The anxiety, the
troubled anticipation, which her words had aroused in him, were wholly
free from shadow of ignoble motive; he was pained, and the frequent
turning away of his look betrayed that part of the feeling was caused
by observation of the woman herself, but every movement visible on his
features was subdued by patience and mildness. Suffering was a life's
habit with him, and its fruit in this instance that which (spite of
moral commonplace) it least often bears--self-conquest.

'You haven't told me yet,' he said, with quiet disregard of her
irrelevancies, 'whether or not her father's name was Joseph Snowdon.'

'There's no call to hide it. That was his name. I've got letters of his
writin'. "J. J. Snowdon" stands at the end, plain enough. And he was
your son, was he?'

'He was. But have you any reason to think he's dead?'

'Dead! I never heard as he was. But then I never heard as he was
livin', neither. When his wife went, poor thing--an' it was a chill on
the liver, they said; it took her very sudden--he says to me, "Mrs.
Peckover," he says, "I know you for a motherly woman"--just like
that--see?--"I know you for a motherly woman," he says, "an' the idea I
have in my 'ed is as I should like to leave Janey in your care,
'cause," he says, "I've got work in Birmingham, an' I don't see how I'm
to take her with me. Understand me?" he says. "Oh!" I says--not feelin'
quite sure what I'd ought to do--see? "Oh!" I says. "Yes," he says;
"an' between you an' me," he says, "there won't be no misunderstanding.
If you'll keep Janey with you"--an' she was goin' to school at the
time, 'cause she went to the same as my own Clem--that's
Clemintiner--understand?--"if you'll keep Janey with you," he says,
"for a year, or maybe two years, or maybe three years--'cause that
depends on cirkinstances"--understand?--"I'm ready," he says, "to pay
you what it's right that pay I should, an' I'm sure," he says, "as we
shouldn't misunderstand one another." Well, of course I had my own girl
to bring up, an' my own son to look after too. A nice sort o' son; just
when he was beginnin' to do well, an' ought to a paid me back for all
the expense I was at in puttin' him to a business, what must he do but
take his 'ook to Australia.'

Her scrutiny discerned something in the listener's face which led her
to ask:

'Perhaps you've been in Australia yourself, mister?'

'I have.'

The woman paused, speculation at work in her eyes.

'Do you know in what part of the country your son is?' inquired the old
man absently.

'He's wrote me two letters, an' the last, as come more than a year ago,
was from a place called Maryborough.'

The other still preserved an absent expression; his eyes travelled
about the room.

'I always said,' pursued Mrs. Peckover, 'as it was Snowdon as put
Australia into the boy's 'ed. He used to tell us he'd got a brother
there, doin' well. P'r'aps it wasn't true.'

'Yes, it was true,' replied the old man coldly. 'But you haven't told
me what came to pass about the child.'

An exact report of all that Mrs. Peckover had to say on this subject
would occupy more space than it merits. The gist of it was that for
less than a year she had received certain stipulated sums irregularly;
that at length no money at all was forthcoming; that in the tenderness
of her heart she had still entertained the child, sent her to school,
privately instructed her in the domestic virtues, trusting that such
humanity would not lack even its material reward, and that either
Joseph Snowdon or someone akin to him would ultimately make good to her
the expenses she had not grudged.

'She's a child as pays you back for all the trouble you take, so much I
_will_ say for her,' observed the matron in conclusion. 'Not as it
hasn't been a little 'ard to teach her tidiness, but she's only a young
thing still. I shouldn't wonder but she's felt her position a little
now an' then; it's only natural in a growin' girl, do what you can to
prevent it. Still, she's willin'; that nobody can deny, an' I'm sure I
should never wish to. Her cirkinstances has been peculiar; that you'll
understand, I'm sure. But I done my best to take the place of the
mother as is gone to a better world. An' now that she's layin' ill, I'm
sure no mother could feel it more--'

'Ill? Why didn't you mention that before?'

'Didn't I say as she was ill? Why, I thought it was the first word I
spoke as soon as you got into the 'ouse. You can't a noticed it, or
else it was me as is so put about. What with havin' a burial--'

'Where is she?' asked the old man anxiously.

'Where? Why, you don't think as I'd a sent her to be looked after by
strangers? She's layin' in Mrs. Hewett's room--that's one o' the
lodgers--all for the sake o' comfort. A better an' kinder woman than
Mrs. Hewett you wouldn't find, not if you was to--'

With difficulty the stranger obtained a few details of the origin and
course of the illness--details wholly misleading, but devised to
reassure. When he desired to see Jane, Mrs. Peckover assumed an air of
perfect willingness, but reminded him that she had nothing save his
word to prove that he had indeed a legitimate interest in the girl.

'I can do no more than tell you that Joseph James Snowdon was my
younger son,' replied the old man simply. 'I've come back to spend my
last years in England, and I hoped--I hope still--to find my son. I
wish to take his child into my own care; as he left her to
strangers--perhaps he didn't do it willingly; he may be dead--he could
have nothing to say against me giving her the care of a parent. You've
been at expense--'

Mrs. Peckover waited with eagerness, but the sentence remained
incomplete. Again the old man's eyes strayed about the room. The
current of his thoughts seemed to change, and he said:

'You could show me those letters you spoke of--of my son's writing?'

'Of course I could,' was the reply, in the tone of coarse resentment
whereby the scheming vulgar are wont to testify to their dishonesty.

'Afterwards--afterwards. I should like to see Jane, if you'll be so
good.'

The mild voice, though often diffident, now and then fell upon a note
of quiet authority which suited well with the speaker's grave, pure
countenance. As he spoke thus, Mrs. Peckover rose, and said she would
first go upstairs just to see how things were. She was absent ten
minutes, then a little girl--Amy Hewett--came into the kitchen and
asked the stranger to follow her.

Jane had been rapidly transferred from the mattress to the bedstead,
and the room had been put into such order as was possible. A whisper
from Mrs. Peckover to Mrs. Hewett, promising remission of half a week's
rent, had sufficed to obtain for the former complete freedom in her
movements. The child, excited by this disturbance, had begun to moan
and talk inarticulately. Mrs. Peckover listened for a moment, but heard
nothing dangerous. She bade the old man enter noiselessly, and herself
went about on tip-toe, speaking only in a hoarse whisper.

The visitor had just reached the bedside, and was gazing with deep,
compassionate interest at the unconscious face, when Jane, as if
startled, half rose and cried painfully, 'Mr. Kirkwood! oh, Mr.
Kirkwood!' and she stretched her hand out, appearing to believe that
the friend she called upon was near her.

'Who is that?' inquired the old man, turning to his companion.

'Only a friend of ours,' answered Mrs. Peckover, herself puzzled and
uneasy.

Again the sick girl called 'Mr. Kirkwood!' but without other words.
Mrs. Peckover urged the danger of this excitement, and speedily led the
way downstairs.




CHAPTER VI

GLIMPSES OF THE PAST

Sidney Kirkwood had a lodging in Tysoe Street, Clerkenwell. It is a
short street, which, like so many in London, begins reputably and
degenerates in its latter half. The cleaner end leads into Wilmington
Square, which consists of decently depressing houses, occupied in the
main, as the lower windows and front-doors indicate, by watchmakers,
working jewellers, and craftsmen of allied pursuits. The open space,
grateful in this neighbourhood, is laid out as a garden, with trees,
beds, and walks. Near the iron gate, which, for certain hours in the
day, gives admission, is a painted notice informing the public that, by
the grace of the Marquis of Northampton, they may here take their ease
on condition of good behaviour; to children is addressed a distinct
warning that 'This is not a playing ground.' From his window Sidney had
a good view of the Square. The house in which he lived was of two
storeys; a brass plate on the door showed the inscription, 'Hodgson,
Dial Painter.' The window on the ground-floor was arched, as in the
other dwellings at this end of the street, and within stood an artistic
arrangement of wax fruit under a glass shade, supported by a heavy
volume of Biblical appearance. The upper storey was graced with a small
iron balcony, on which straggled a few flower-pots. However, the
exterior of this abode was, by comparison, promising; the curtains and
blinds were clean, the step was washed and whitened, the brass plate
shone, the panes of glass had at all events acquaintance with a duster.
A few yards in the direction away from the Square, and Tysoe Street
falls under the dominion of dry-rot.

It was not until he set forth to go to work next morning that Sidney
called to mind his conversation with Jane. That the child should have
missed by five minutes a meeting with someone who perchance had the
will and the power to befriend her, seemed to him, in his present mood,
merely an illustration of a vice inherent in the nature of things. He
determined to look in at the public-house of which she had spoken, and
hear for himself what manner of man had made inquiries for people named
Snowdon. The name was not a common one; it was worth while to spend a
hope or two on the chance of doing Jane a kindness. Her look and voice
when he bade her be of good courage had touched him. In his rejected
state, he felt that it was pleasant to earn gratitude even from so
humble a being as the Peckovers' drudge.

His workshop, it has been mentioned, was in St. John's Square. Of all
areas in London thus defined, this Square of St. John is probably the
most irregular in outline. It is cut in two by Clerkenwell Road, and
the buildings which compose it form such a number of recesses, of
abortive streets, of shadowed alleys, that from no point of the Square
can anything like a general view of its totality be obtained. The exit
from it on the south side is by St. John's Lane, at the entrance to
which stands a survival from a buried world--the embattled and windowed
archway which is all that remains above ground of the great Priory of
St. John of Jerusalem. Here dwelt the Knights Hospitallers, in days
when Clerkenwell was a rural parish, distant by a long stretch of green
country from the walls of London. But other and nearer memories are
revived by St. John's Arch. In the rooms above the gateway dwelt, a
hundred and fifty years ago, one Edward Cave, publisher of the
_Gentleman's Magazine_, and there many a time has sat a journeyman
author of his, by name Samuel Johnson, too often _impransus_. There it
was that the said Samuel once had his dinner handed to him behind a
screen, because of his unpresentable costume, when Cave was
entertaining an aristocratic guest. In the course of the meal, the
guest happened to speak with interest of something he had recently read
by an obscure Mr. Johnson; whereat there was joy behind the screen, and
probably increased appreciation of the unwonted dinner. After a walk
amid the squalid and toil-infested ways of Clerkenwell, it impresses
one strangely to come upon this monument of old time. The archway has a
sad, worn, grimy aspect. So closely is it packed in among buildings
which suggest nothing but the sordid struggle for existence, that it
looks depressed, ashamed, tainted by the ignobleness of its
surroundings. The wonder is that it has not been swept away, in
obedience to the great law of traffic and the spirit of the time.

St. John's Arch had a place in Sidney Kirkwood's earliest memories.
From the window of his present workshop he could see its grey
battlements, and they reminded him of the days when, as a lad just
beginning to put questions about the surprising world in which he found
himself, he used to listen to such stories as his father could tell him
of the history of Clerkenwell. Mr. Kirkwood occupied part of a house in
St. John's Lane, not thirty yards from the Arch; he was a printers'
roller maker, and did but an indifferent business. A year after the
birth of Sidney, his only child, he became a widower. An intelligent,
warm-hearted man, the one purpose of his latter years was to realise
such moderate competency as should place his son above the anxieties
which degrade. The boy had a noticeable turn for drawing and colouring;
at ten years old, when (as often happened) his father took him for a
Sunday in the country, he carried a sketch-book and found his delight
in using it. Sidney was to be a draughtsman of some kind; perhaps an
artist, if all went well. Unhappily things went the reverse of well. In
his anxiety to improve his business, Mr. Kirkwood invented a new kind
of 'composition' for printers' use; he patented it, risked capital upon
it, made in a short time some serious losses. To add to his troubles,
young Sidney was giving signs of an unstable character; at fifteen he
had grown tired of his drawing, wanted to be this, that, and the other
thing, was self-willed, and showed no consideration for his father's
difficulties. It was necessary to take a decided step, and, though
against his will, Sidney was apprenticed to an uncle, a Mr. Roach, who
also lived in Clerkenwell, and was a working jeweller. Two years later
the father died, all but bankrupt. The few pounds realised from his
effects passed into the hands of Mr. Roach, and were soon expended in
payment for Sidney's board and lodging.

His bereavement possibly saved Sidney from a young-manhood of
foolishness and worse. In the upper world a youth may 'sow his wild
oats' and have done with it; in the nether, 'to have your fling' is
almost necessarily to fall among criminals. The death was sudden; it
affected the lad profoundly, and filled him with a remorse which was to
influence the whole of his life. Mr. Roach, a thick-skinned and rather
thick-headed person, did not spare to remind his apprentice of the most
painful things wherewith the latter had to reproach himself. Sidney
bore it, from this day beginning a course of self-discipline of which
not many are capable at any age, and very few indeed at seventeen.
Still, there had never been any sympathy between him and his uncle, and
before very long the young man saw his way to live under another roof
and find work with a new employer.

It was just after leaving his uncle's house that Sidney came to know
John Hewett; the circumstances which fostered their friendship were
such as threw strong light on the characters of both. Sidney had taken
a room in Islington, and two rooms on the floor beneath him were
tenanted by a man who was a widower and had two children. In those
days, our young friend found much satisfaction in spending his Sunday
evenings on Clerkenwell Green, where fervent, if ungrammatical, oratory
was to be heard, and participation in debate was open to all whom the
spirit moved. One whom the spirit did very frequently move was Sidney's
fellow-lodger; he had no gift of expression whatever, but his brief,
stammering protests against this or that social wrong had such an
honest, indeed such a pathetic sound, that Sidney took an opportunity
of walking home with him and converting neighbourship into friendly
acquaintance. John Hewett gave the young man an account of his life. He
had begun as a lath-render; later he had got into cabinet-making,
started a business on his own account, and failed. A brother of his,
who was a builder's foreman, then found employment for him in general
carpentry on some new houses; but John quarrelled with his brother, and
after many difficulties fell to the making of packing-cases; that was
his work at present, and with much discontent he pursued it. John was
curiously frank in owning all the faults in himself which had helped to
make his career so unsatisfactory. He confessed that he had an
uncertain temper, that he soon became impatient with work 'which led to
nothing,' that he was tempted out of his prudence by anything which
seemed to offer 'a better start.' With all these admissions, he
maintained that he did well to be angry. It was wrong that life should
be so hard; so much should not be required of a man. In body he was not
strong; the weariness of interminable days over-tried him and excited
his mind to vain discontent. His wife was the only one who could ever
keep him cheerful under his lot, and his wedded life had lasted but six
years; now there was his lad Bob and his little girl Clara to think of,
and it only made him more miserable to look forward and see them going
through hardships like his own. Things were wrong somehow, and it
seemed to him that 'if only we could have universal suffrage--'

Sidney was only eighteen, and strong in juvenile Radicalism, but he had
a fund of common sense, and such a conclusion as this of poor John's
half-astonished, half-amused him. However, the man's personality
attracted him; it was honest, warm-hearted, interesting; the logic of
his pleadings might be at fault, but Sidney sympathised with him, for
all that. He too felt that 'things were wrong somehow,' and had a
pleasure in joining the side of revolt for revolt's sake.

Now in the same house with them dwelt a young woman of about nineteen
years old; she occupied a garret, was seldom seen about, and had every
appearance of being a simple, laborious girl, of the kind familiar
enough as the silent victims of industrialism. One day the house was
thrown into consternation by the news that Miss Barnes--so she was
named--had been arrested on a charge of stealing her employer's goods.
It was true, and perhaps the best way of explaining it will be to
reproduce a newspaper report which Sidney Kirkwood thereafter preserved.

'On Friday, Margaret Barnes, nineteen, a single woman, was indicted for
stealing six jackets, value 5_l_., the property of Mary Oaks, her
mistress. The prisoner, who cried bitterly during the proceedings,
pleaded guilty. The prosecutrix is a single woman, and gets her living
by mantle-making, She engaged the prisoner to do what is termed
"finishing off," that is, making the button-holes and sewing on the
buttons. The prisoner was also employed to fetch the work from the
warehouse, and deliver it when finished. On September 7th her mistress
sent her with the six jackets, and she never returned. Sergeant Smith,
a detective, who apprehended the prisoner, said he had made inquiries
in the case, and found that up to this time the prisoner had borne a
good character as an honest, hard-working girl. She had quitted her
former lodgings, which had no furniture but a small table and a few
rags in a corner, and he discovered her in a room which was perfectly
bare. Miss Oaks was examined, and said the prisoner was employed from
nine in the morning to eight at night. The Judge: How much did you pay
her per week? Miss Oaks: Four shillings. The Judge: Did you give her
her food? Miss Oaks: No; I only get one shilling each for the jackets
myself when completed. I have to use two sewing-machines, find my own
cotton and needles, and I can, by working hard, make two in a day. The
Judge said it was a sad state of things. The prisoner, when called
upon, said she had had nothing to eat for three days, and so gave way
to temptation, hoping to get better employment. The Judge, while
commiserating with the prisoner, said it could not be allowed that
distress should justify dishonesty, and sentenced the prisoner to six
weeks' imprisonment.'

The six weeks passed, and about a fortnight after that, John Hewett
came into Sidney's room one evening with a strange look on his face.
His eyes were very bright, the hand which he held out trembled.

'I've something to tell you,' he said. 'I'm going to get married again.'

'Really? Why, I'm glad to hear it!'

'And who do you think? Miss Barnes.'

Sidney was startled for a moment. John had had no acquaintance with the
girl prior to her imprisonment. He had said that he should meet her
when she came out and give her some money, and Sidney had added a
contribution. For a man in Hewett's circumstances this latest step was
somewhat astonishing, but his character explained it.

'I'm goin' to marry her,' he exclaimed excitedly, 'and I'm doing the
right thing! I respect her more than all the women as never went wrong
because they never had occasion to. I'm goin' to put her as a mother
over my children, and I'm goin' to make a happier life for her. She's a
good girl, I tell you. I've seen her nearly every day this fortnight; I
know all about her. She wouldn't have me when I first asked her--that
was a week ago. She said no; she'd disgrace me. If you can't respect
her as you would any other woman, never come into my lodging!'

Sidney was warm with generous glow. He wrung Hewett's hand and
stammered incoherent words.

John took new lodgings in an obscure part of Clerkenwell, and seemed to
have become a young man once more. His complaints ceased; the energy
with which he went about his work was remarkable. He said his wife was
the salvation of him. And then befell one of those happy chances which
supply mankind with instances for its pathetic faith that a good deed
will not fail of reward. John's brother died, and bequeathed to him
some four hundred pounds. Hereupon, what must the poor fellow do but
open workshops on his own account, engage men, go about crying that his
opportunity had come at last. Here was the bit of rock by means of
which he could save himself from the sea of competition that had so
nearly whelmed him! Little Clara, now eleven years old, could go on
steadily at school; no need to think of how the poor child should earn
a wretched living. Bob, now thirteen, should shortly be apprenticed to
some better kind of trade. New rooms were taken and well furnished.
Maggie, the wife, could have good food, such as she needed in her
constant ailing, alas! The baby just born was no longer a cause of
anxious thought, but a joy in the home. And Sidney Kirkwood came to
supper as soon as the new rooms were in order, and his bright, manly
face did everyone good to look at. He still took little Clara upon his
knee. Ha! there would come a day before long when he would not venture
to do that, and then perhaps--perhaps! What a supper that was, and how
smoothly went the great wheels of the world that evening!

One baby, two babies, three babies; before the birth of the third,
John's brow was again clouded, again he had begun to rail and fume at
the unfitness of things. His business was a failure, partly because he
dealt with a too rigid honesty, partly because of his unstable nature,
which left him at the mercy of whims and obstinacies and airy projects.
He did not risk the ordinary kind of bankruptcy, but came down and
down, until at length he was the only workman in his own shop; then the
shop itself had to be abandoned; then he was searching for someone who
would employ him.

Bob had been put to the die-sinker's craft; Clara was still going to
school, and had no thought of earning a livelihood--ominous state of
things, When it shortly became clear even to John Hewett that he would
wrong the girl if he did not provide her with some means of supporting
herself, she was sent to learn 'stamping' with the same employer for
whom her brother worked. The work was light; it would soon bring in a
little money. John declared with fierceness that his daughter should
never be set to the usual needle-slavery, and indeed it seemed very
unlikely that Clara would ever be fit for that employment, as she could
not do the simplest kind of sewing. In the meantime the family kept
changing their abode, till at length they settled in Mrs. Peckover's
house. All the best of their furniture was by this time sold; but for
the two eldest children, there would probably have been no home at all.
Bob, aged nineteen, earned at this present time a pound weekly; his
sister, an average of thirteen shillings. Mrs. Hewett's constant
ill-health (the result, doubtless, of semi-starvation through the years
of her girlhood), would have excused defects of housekeeping; but
indeed the poor woman was under any circumstances incapable of domestic
management, and therein represented her class. The money she received
was wasted in comparison with what might have been done with it. I
suppose she must not be blamed for bringing children into the world
when those already born to her were but half-clothed, half-fed; she
increased the sum total of the world's misery in obedience to the laws
of the Book of Genesis. And one virtue she had which compensated for
all that was lacking--a virtue merely negative among the refined, but
in that other world the rarest and most precious of moral
distinctions--she resisted the temptations of the public-house.

This was the story present in Sidney Kirkwood's mind as often as he
climbed the staircase in Clerkenwell Close. By contrast, his own life
seemed one of unbroken ease. Outwardly it was smooth enough. He had no
liking for his craft, and being always employed upon the meaningless
work which is demanded by the rich vulgar, he felt such work to be
paltry and ignoble; but there seemed no hope of obtaining better, and
he made no audible complaint. His wages were consider ably more than he
needed, and systematically he put money aside each week.

But this orderly existence concealed conflicts of heart and mind which
Sidney himself could not have explained, could not lucidly have
described. The moral shock which he experienced at his father's death
put an end to the wanton play of his energies, but it could not ripen
him before due time; his nature was not of the sterile order common in
his world, and through passion, through conflict, through endurance, it
had to develop such maturity as fate should permit. Saved from
self-indulgence, he naturally turned into the way of political
enthusiasm; thither did his temper point him. With some help--mostly
negative--from Clerkenwell Green, he reached the stage of confident and
aspiring Radicalism, believing in the perfectibility of man, in human
brotherhood, in--anything you like that is the outcome of a noble heart
sheltered by ignorance. It had its turn, and passed.

To give place to nothing very satisfactory. It was not a mere
coincidence that Sidney was going through a period of mental and moral
confusion just in those years which brought Clara Hewett from childhood
to the state of woman. Among the acquaintances of Sidney's boyhood
there was not one but had a chosen female companion from the age of
fifteen or earlier; he himself had been no exception to the rule in his
class, but at the time of meeting with Hewett he was companionless, and
remained so. The Hewetts became his closest friends; in their brief
prosperity he rejoiced with them, in their hardships he gave them all
the assistance to which John's pride would consent; his name was never
spoken among them but with warmth and gratitude. And of course the day
came to which Hewett had looked forward--the day when Sidney could no
longer take Clara upon his knee and stroke her brown hair and joke with
her about her fits of good and ill humour. Sidney knew well enough what
was in his friend's mind, and, though with no sense of constraint, he
felt that this handsome, keen-eyed, capricious girl was destined to be
his wife. He liked Clara; she always attracted him and interested him;
but her faults were too obvious to escape any eye, and the older she
grew, the more was he impressed and troubled by them. The thought of
Clara became a preoccupation, and with the love which at length he
recognised there blended a sense of fate fulfilling itself. His
enthusiasms, his purposes, never defined as education would have
defined them, were dissipated into utter vagueness. He lost his guiding
interests, and found himself returning to those of boyhood. The country
once more attracted him; he took out his old sketch-books, bought a new
one, revived the regret that he could not be a painter of landscape. A
visit to one or two picture-galleries, and then again profound
discouragement, recognition of the fact that he was a mechanic and
never could be anything else.

It was the end of his illusions. For him not even passionate love was
to preserve the power of idealising its object. He loved Clara with all
the desire of his being, but could no longer deceive himself in judging
her character. The same sad clearness of vision affected his judgment
of the world about him, of the activities in which he had once been
zealous, of the conditions which enveloped his life and the lives of
those dear to him. The spirit of revolt often enough stirred within
him, but no longer found utterance in the speech which brings relief;
he did his best to dispel the mood, mocking at it as folly. Consciously
he set himself the task of becoming a practical man, of learning to
make the best of life as he found it, of shunning as the fatal error
that habit of mind which kept John Hewett on the rack. Who was he that
he should look for pleasant things in his course through the world? 'We
are the lower orders; we are the working classes,' he said bitterly to
his friend, and that seemed the final answer to all his aspirations.

This was a dark day with him. The gold he handled stung him to hatred
and envy, and every feeling which he had resolved to combat as worse
than profitless. He could not speak to his fellow-workmen. From morning
to night it had rained. St. John's Arch looked more broken-spirited
than ever, drenched in sooty moisture.

During the dinner-hour he walked over to the public-house of which Jane
had spoken, and obtained from the barman as full a description as
possible of the person he hoped to encounter. Both then and on his
return home in the evening he shunned the house where his friends dwelt.

It came round to Monday. For the first time for many months he had
allowed Sunday to pass without visiting the Hewetts. He felt that to go
there at present would only be to increase the parents' depression by
his own low spirits. Clara had left them now, however, and if he still
stayed away, his behaviour might be misinterpreted. On returning from
work, he washed, took a hurried meal, and was on the point of going out
when someone knocked at his door. He opened, and saw an old man who was
a stranger to him.




CHAPTER VII

MRS. BYASS'S LODGINGS

'You are Mr. Kirkwood?' said his visitor civilly. 'My name is Snowdon.
I should be glad to speak a few words with you, if you could spare the
time.'

Sidney's thoughts were instantly led into the right channel; he
identified the old man by his white hair and the cloak. The hat,
however, which had been described to him, was now exchanged for a soft
felt of a kind common enough; the guernsey, too, had been laid aside.
With ready goodwill he invited Mr. Snowdon to enter.

There was not much in the room to distinguish it from the dwelling of
any orderly mechanic. A small bed occupied one side; a small table
stood before the window; the toilet apparatus was, of course,
unconcealed; a half-open cupboard allowed a glimpse of crockery,
sundries, and a few books. The walls, it is true, were otherwise
ornamented than is usual; engravings, chromo-lithographs, and some
sketches of landscape in pencil, were suspended wherever light fell,
and the choice manifested in this collection was nowise akin to that
which ruled in Mrs. Peckover's parlour, and probably in all the
parlours of Tysoe Street. To select for one's chamber a woodcut after
Constable or Gainsborough is at all events to give proof of a capacity
for civilisation.

The visitor made a quick survey of these appearances; then he seated
himself on the chair Sidney offered. He was not entirely at his ease,
and looked up at the young man twice or thrice before he began to speak
again.

'Mr. Kirkwood, were you ever acquainted with my son, by name Joseph
Snowdon?'

'No; I never knew him,' was the reply. 'I have heard his name, and I
know where he once lived--not far from here.'

'You're wondering what has brought me to you. I have heard of you from
people a grandchild of mine is living with. I dare say it is the house
you mean--in Clerkenwell Close.'

'So you have found it!' exclaimed Sidney with pleasure. 'I've been
looking about for you as I walked along the streets these last two or
three days.'

'Looking for me?' said the other, astonished.

Sidney supplied the explanation, but without remarking on the
circumstances which made Jane so anxious to discover a possible friend.
Snowdon listened attentively, and at length, with a slight smile; he
seemed to find pleasure in the young man's way of expressing himself.
When silence ensued, he looked about absently for a moment; then,
meeting Sidney's eyes, said in a grave voice:

'That poor child is very ill.'

'Ill? I'm sorry to hear it.'

'The reason I've come to you, Mr. Kirkwood, is because she's called out
your name so often. They don't seem able to tell me how she came into
this state, but she's had a fright of some kind, or she's been living
very unhappily. She calls on your name, as if she wanted you to protect
her from harm. I didn't know what to think about it at first. I'm a
stranger to everybody--I may tell you I've been abroad for several
years--and they don't seem very ready to put trust in me; but I decided
at last that I'd come and speak to you. It's my grandchild, and perhaps
the only one of my family left; nobody can give me news of her father
since he went away four or five years ago. She came to herself this
morning for a little, but I'm afraid she couldn't understand what I
tried to tell her; then I mentioned your name, and I could see it did
her good at once. What I wish to ask of you is, would you come to her
bedside for a few minutes? She might know you, and I feel sure it would
be a kindness to her.'

Sidney appeared to hesitate. It was not, of course, that he dreamt of
refusing, but he was busy revolving all he knew of Jane's life with the
Peckovers, and asking himself what it behoved him to tell, what to
withhold. Daily experience guarded him against the habit of gossip,
which is one of the innumerable curses of the uneducated (whether poor
or wealthy), and, notwithstanding the sympathy with which his visitor
inspired him, he quickly decided to maintain reserve until he
understood more of the situation.

'Yes, yes; I'll go with you at once,' he made haste to reply, when he
perceived that his hesitancy was occasioning doubt and trouble. 'In
fact, I was just starting to go and see the Hewetts when you knocked at
the door. They're friends of mine--living in Mrs. Peckover's house.
That's how I came to know Jane. I haven't been there for several days,
and when I last saw her, as I was saying, she seemed as well as usual.'

'I'm afraid that wasn't much to boast of,' said Snowdon. 'She's a poor,
thin-looking child.'

Sidney was conscious that the old man did not give expression to all he
thought. This mutual exercise of tact seemed, however, to encourage a
good understanding between them rather than the reverse.

'You remain in the house?' Kirkwood asked as they went downstairs.

'I stay with her through the night. I didn't feel much confidence in
the doctor that was seeing her, so I made inquiries and found a better
man.'

When they reached the Close, the door was opened to them by Clem
Peckover. She glared haughtily at Sidney, but uttered no word. To
Kirkwood's surprise, they went up to the Hewetts' back-room. The
mattress that formerly lay upon the floor had been removed; the bed was
occupied by the sick girl, with whom at present Mrs. Peckover was
sitting. That benevolent person rose on seeing Sidney, and inclined her
head with stateliness.

'She's just fell asleep,' was her whispered remark. 'I shouldn't say
myself as it was good to wake her up, but of course you know best.'

This was in keeping with the attitude Mrs. Peckover had adopted as soon
as she understood Snowdon's resolve to neglect no precaution on the
child's behalf. Her sour dignity was meant to express that she felt
hurt at the intervention of others where her affections were so nearly
concerned. Sidney could not help a certain fear when he saw this woman
installed as sick-nurse. It was of purpose that he caught her eye and
regarded her with a gravity she could scarcely fail to comprehend.

Jane awoke from her fitful slumber. She looked with but half-conscious
fearfulness at the figures darkening her view. Sidney moved so that his
face was in the light, and, bending near to her, asked if she
recognised him. A smile--slow-forming, but unmistakable at last--amply
justified what her grandfather had said. She made an effort to move her
hand towards him. Sidney responded to her wish, and again she smiled,
self-forgetfully, contentedly.

Snowdon turned to Mrs. Peckover, and, after a few words with regard to
the treatment that was being pursued, said that he would now relieve
her; she lingered, but shortly left the room. Sidney, sitting by the
bed, in a few minutes saw that Jane once more slept, or appeared to do
so. He whispered to Snowdon that he was going to see his friends in the
next room, and would look in again before leaving.

His tap at the door was answered by Amy, who at once looked back and
said:

'Can Mr. Kirkwood come in, mother?'

'Yes; I want to see him,' was the answer.

Mrs. Hewett was lying in bed; she looked, if possible, more wretchedly
ill than four days ago. On the floor were two mattresses, covered to
make beds for the children. The baby, held in its mother's arms, was
crying feebly.

'Why, I hoped you were getting much better by now,' said Sidney.

Mrs. Hewett told him that she had been to the hospital on Saturday, and
seemed to have caught cold. A common enough occurrence; hours of
waiting in an out-patients' room frequently do more harm than the
doctor's advice can remedy. She explained that Mrs. Peckover had
requested the use of the other room.

'There's too many of us to be livin' an' sleepin' in this Little
place,' she said; 'but, after all, it's a savin' of rent. It's a good
thing Clara isn't here. An' you've heard as John's got work?'

He had found a job at length with a cabinet-maker; tonight he would
probably be working till ten or eleven o'clock. Good news so far. Then
Mrs. Hewett began to speak with curiosity of the old man who claimed
Jane as his grandchild. Sidney told her what had just happened.

'An' what did you say about the girl?' she asked anxiously.

'I said as little as I could; I thought it wisest. Do you know what
made her ill?'

'It was that Clem as did it,' Mrs. Hewett replied, subduing her voice,
And she related what had befallen after Sidney's last visit. 'Mrs.
Peckover, she's that afraid the truth should get out. Of course I don't
want to make no bother, but I do feel that glad the poor thing's got
somebody to look after her at last. I never told you half the things as
used to go on. That Clem's no better than a wild-beast tiger; but then
what can you do? There's never any good comes out of makin' a bother
with other people's business, is there? Fancy him comin' to see you!
Mrs. Peckover's afraid of him, I can see that, though she pretends she
isn't goin' to stand him interferin'. What do you think about him,
Sidney? He's sent for a doctor out of Islington; wouldn't have nothin'
to say to the other. He must have plenty of money, don't you think?
Mrs. Peckover says he's goin' to pay the money owin' to her for Jane's
keep. As if the poor thing hadn't more than paid for her bits of meals
an' her bed in the kitchen! Do you think that woman 'ud ever have kept
her if it wasn't she could make her a servant with no wages? If Jane
'ud been a boy, she'd a gone to the workhouse long ago. She's been that
handy, poor little mite! I've always done what I could for her; you
know that, Sidney. I do hope she'll get over it. If anything happens,
mind my word, there'll be a nice to-do! Clara says she'll go to a
magistrate an' let it all out, if nobody else will. She hates the
Peckovers, Clara does.'

'It won't come to that,' said Sidney. 'I can see the old man'll take
her away as soon as possible. He may have a little money; he's just
come back from Australia. I like the look of him myself.'

He began to talk of other subjects; waxed wrath at the misery of this
housing to which the family had shrunk; urged a removal from the vile
den as soon as ever it could be managed. Sidney always lost control of
himself when he talked with the Hewetts of their difficulties; the
people were, from his point of view, so lacking in resource, so
stubbornly rooted in profitless habit. Over and over again he had
implored them to take a rational view of the case, to borrow a few
pounds of him, to make a new beginning on clean soil. It was like
contending with some hostile force of nature; lie spent himself in vain.

As Hewett did not return, he at length took his leave, and went into
the back-room for a moment.

'She's asleep,' said Snowdon, rising from the chair where he had been
sitting deep in thought. 'It's a good sign.'

Sidney just looked towards the bed, and nodded with satisfaction. The
old man gave him a warm pressure of the hand, and he departed. All the
way home, he thought with singular interest of the bare sick-room, of
the white-headed man watching through the night; the picture impressed
him in a way that could not be explained by its natural pathos merely;
it kept suggesting all sorts of fanciful ideas, due in a measure,
possibly, to Mrs. Hewett's speculations. For an hour he was so lost in
musing on the subject that he even rested from the misery of his
ceaseless thought of Clara.

He allowed three days to pass, then went to inquire about Jane's
progress. It had been satisfactory. Subsequent visits brought him to
terms of a certain intimacy with Snowdon. The latter mentioned at
length that he was looking for two rooms, suitable for himself and
Jane. He wished them to be in a decent house, somewhere in Clerkenwell,
and the rent was not to be more than a working man could afford.

'You don't know of anything in your street?' he asked diffidently.

Something in the tone struck Sidney. It half expressed a wish to live
in his neighbourhood if possible. He looked at his companion (they were
walking together), and was met in return with a glance of calm
friendliness; it gratified him, strengthened the feeling of respect and
attachment which had already grown out of this intercourse. In Tysoe
Street, however, no accommodation could be found. Sidney had another
project in his thoughts; pursuing it, he paid a visit the next evening
to certain acquaintances of his named Byass, who had a house in Hanover
Street, Islington, and let lodgings. Hanover Street lies to the north
of City Road; it is a quiet byway, of curving form, and consists of
dwellings only. Squalor is here kept at arm's length; compared with
regions close at hand, this and the contiguous streets have something
of a suburban aspect.

Three or four steps led up to the house-door. Sidney's knock summoned a
young, healthy-faced, comely woman, who evinced hearty pleasure on
seeing who her visitor was. She brought him at once into a parlour on
the ground-floor.

'Well, an' I was only this mornin' tellin' Sam to go an' look after
you, or write a note, or somethin'! Why can't you come round oftener?
I've no patience with you! You just sit at 'ome an' get humped, an'
what's the good o' that, I should like to know? I thought you'd took
offence with me, an' so I told Sam. Do you want to know how baby is?
Why don't you ask, then, as you ought to do the first thing? He's a
good deal better than he deserves to be, young rascal--all the trouble
he gives me! He's fast asleep, I'm glad to say, so you can't see him.
Sam'll be back in a few minutes; at least I expect him, but there's no
knowin' nowadays when lie can leave the warehouse. What's brought you
to-night, I wonder? You needn't tell me anything about the Upper Street
business; _I_ know all about _that_!'

'Oh, do you? From Clara herself?'

'Yes. Don't talk to me about her! There! I'm sick an tired of her--an'
so are you, I should think, if you've any sense left. Her an' me can't
get along, an' that's the truth. Why, when I met her on Sunday
afternoon, she was that patronisin' you'd have thought she'd got a
place in Windsor Castle. Would she come an' have a cup of tea? Oh dear,
no! Hadn't time! The Princess of Wales, I suppose, was waitin' round
the corner!'

Having so relieved her mind, Mrs. Byass laughed with a genuine gaiety
which proved how little malice there was in her satire. Sidney could
not refuse a smile, but it was a gloomy one.

'I'm not sure you've done all you might have to keep her friends with
you,' he said seriously, but with a good-natured look.

'There you go!' exclaimed Mrs. Byass, throwing back her head. 'Of
course everybody must be in fault sooner than _her_! She's an angel is
Miss Hewett! Poor dear! to think how shameful she's been used! Now I do
wonder how you've the face to say such things, Mr. Kirkwood! Why,
there's nobody else livin' would have been as patient with her as I
always was. I'm not bad-tempered, I will say that for myself, an' I've
put up with all sorts of things (me, a married woman), when anyone else
would have boxed her ears and told her she was a conceited minx. I used
to be fond of Clara; you know I did. But she's got beyond all bearin';
and if you wasn't just as foolish as men always are, you'd see her in
her true colours. Do shake yourself a bit, do! Oh, you silly, silly
man!'

Again she burst into ringing laughter, throwing herself backwards and
forwards, and at last covering her face with her hands. Sidney looked
annoyed, but the contagion of such spontaneous merriment in the end
brought another smile to his face. He moved his head in sign of giving
up the argument, and, as soon as there was silence, turned to the
object of his visit.

'I see you've still got the card in the window. I shouldn't wonder if I
could find you a lodger for those top-rooms.'

'And who's that? No children, mind.'

Sidney told her what he could of the old man. Of Jane he only said that
she had hitherto lived with the Hewetts' landlady, and was now going to
be removed by her grandfather, having just got through an illness. Dire
visions of infection at once assailed Mrs. Byass; impossible to admit
under the same roof with her baby a person who had just been ill. This
scruple was, however, overcome; the two rooms at the top of the
house--unfurnished--had been long vacant, owing to fastidiousness in
Mr. and Mrs. Byass, since their last lodger, after a fortnight of
continuous drunkenness, broke the windows, ripped the paper off the
walls, and ended by trying to set fire to the house. Sidney was
intrusted with an outline treaty, to be communicated to Mr. Snowdon.

This discussion was just concluded when Mr. Samuel Byass presented
himself--a slender, large-headed young man, with very light hair
cropped close upon the scalp, and a foolish face screwed into an
expression of facetiousness. He was employed in some clerkly capacity
at a wholesale stationer's in City Road. Having stepped into the room,
he removed a very brown silk hat and laid it on a chair, winking the
while at Sidney with his right eye; then he removed his overcoat,
winking with the left eye. Thus disembarrassed, he strode gravely to
the fireplace, took up the poker, held it in the manner of a weapon
upright against his shoulder, and exclaimed in a severe voice, 'Eyes
right!' Then, converting the poker into a sword, he drew near to Sidney
and affected to practise upon him the military cuts, his features
distorted into grotesque ferocity. Finally, assuming the attitude of a
juggler, he made an attempt to balance the poker perpendicularly upon
his nose, until it fell with a crash, just missing the ornaments on the
mantel-piece. All this time Mrs. Byass shrieked with laughter, with
difficulty keeping her chair.

'Oh, Sam,' she panted forth, her handkerchief at her eyes, 'what a fool
you are! Do stop, or you'll kill me!'

Vastly gratified, Samuel advanced with ludicrous gestures towards the
visitor, held out his hand, and said with affected nasality, 'How do
you do, sir? It's some time since I had the pleasure of seeing you,
sir. I hope you have been pretty tolerable.'

'_Isn't_ he a fool, Mr. Kirkwood?' cried the delighted wife. 'Do just
give him a smack on the side of the head, to please me! Sam, go an'
wash, an' we'll have supper. What do you mean by being so late
to-night?'

'Where's the infant?' asked Mr. Byass, thrusting his hands into his
waistcoat pockets and peering about the room. 'Bring forth the infant!
Let a fond parent look upon his child.'

'Go an' wash, or I'll throw something at you. Baby's in bed, and mind,
you wake him if you dare!'

Sidney would have taken his leave, but found it impossible. Mrs. Byass
declared that if he would not stay to supper he should never enter the
house again.

'Let's make a night of it!' cried Sam, standing in the doorway. 'Let's
have three pots of six ale and a bottle of old Tom! Let us be reckless!'

His wife caught up the pillow from the sofa and hurled it at him.
Samuel escaped just in time. The next moment his head was again thrust
forward.

'Let's send to the High Street for three cold roast fowls and a
beef-steak pie! Let's get custards and cheese-cakes and French pastry!
Let's have a pine-apple and preserved ginger! Who says, Go it for once?'

Mrs. Byass caught up the poker and sprang after him. From the passage
came sounds of scuffling and screaming, and in the end of something
produced by the lips. Mrs. Byass then showed a very red face at the
door, and said:

'_Isn't_ he a fool? Just wait a minute while I get the table laid.'

Supper was soon ready in the comfortable kitchen. A cold shoulder of
mutton, a piece of cheese, pickled beetroot, a seed-cake, and raspberry
jam; such was the fare to which Bessie Byass invited her husband and
her guest. On a side-table were some open cardboard boxes containing
artificial flowers and leaves; for Bessie had now and then a little
'mounting' to do for a shop in Upper Street, and in that way aided the
income of the family. She was in even better spirits than usual at the
prospect of letting her top-rooms. On hearing that piece of news,
Samuel, who had just come from the nearest public-house with a foaming
jug, executed a wild dance round the room and inadvertently knocked two
plates from the dresser. This accident made his wife wrathful, but only
for a moment; presently she was laughing as unrestrainedly as ever, and
bestowing upon the repentant young man her familiar flattery.

At eleven o'clock Sidney left them, and mused with smiles on his way
home. This was not exactly his ideal of domestic happiness, yet it was
better than the life led by the Hewetts--better than that of other
households with which he was acquainted--better far, it seemed to him,
than the aspirations which were threatening to lead poor Clara--who
knew whither? A temptation beset him to walk round into Upper Street
and pass Mrs. Tubbs's bar. He resisted it, knowing that the result
would only be a night of sleepless anger and misery.

The next day he again saw Snowdon, and spoke to him of Mrs. Byass's
rooms. The old man seemed at first indisposed to go so far; but when he
had seen the interior of the house and talked with the landlady, his
objections disappeared. Before another week had passed the two rooms
were furnished in the simplest possible way, and Snowdon brought Jane
from Clerkenwell Close.

Kirkwood came by invitation as soon as the two were fairly established
in their home. He found Jane sitting by the fire in her grandfather's
room; a very little exertion still out-wearied her, and the strange
things that had come to pass had made her habitually silent. She looked
about her wonderingly, seemed unable to realise her position, was
painfully conscious of her new clothes, ever and again started as if in
fear.

'Well, what did I say that night?' was Sidney's greeting. 'Didn't I
tell you it would be all right soon?'

Jane made no answer in words, but locked at him timidly; and then a
smile came upon her face, an expression of joy that could not trust
itself, that seemed to her too boldly at variance with all she had yet
known of life.




CHAPTER VIII

PENNYLOAF CANDY
