
'Why not go home?'

'Because I don't choose to. I don't see that it concerns you, Mr.
Kirkwood.'

Their eyes met, and Sidney felt how little fitted he was to reason with
the girl, even would she consent to hear him. His mood was the wrong
one; the torrid sunshine seemed to kindle an evil fire in him, and with
difficulty he kept back words of angry unreason; he even--strangest of
inconsistencies--experienced a kind of brutal pleasure in her obvious
misery. Already she was reaping the fruit of obstinate folly. Clara
read what his eyes expressed; she trembled with responsive hostility.

'No, it doesn't concern me,' Sidney replied, half turning away. 'But
it's perhaps as well you should know that Mrs. Tubbs is doing her best
to take away your good name. However little we are to each other, it's
my duty to tell you that, and put you on your guard. I hope your father
mayn't hear these stories before you have spoken to him yourself.'

Clara listened with a contemptuous smile.

'What has she been saying?'

'I shan't repeat it.'

As he gazed at her, the haggardness of her countenance smote like a
sword-edge through all the black humours about his heart, piercing the
very core of love and pity. He spoke in a voice of passionate appeal.

'Clara, come home before it is too late! Come with me--now--come at
once? Thank heaven you have got out of that place! Come home, and stay
there quietly till we can find you something better.'

'I'll die rather than go home!' was her answer, flung at him as if in
hatred. 'Tell my father that, and tell him anything else you like. I
want no one to take any thought for me; and I wouldn't do as _you_
wish, not to save my soul!'

How often, in passing along the streets, one catches a few phrases of
discord such as this! The poor can seldom command privacy; their scenes
alike of tenderness and of anger must for the most part be enacted on
the peopled ways. It is one of their misfortunes, one of the many
necessities which blunt feeling, which balk reconciliation, which
enhance the risks of dialogue at best semi-articulate.

Clara, having uttered the rancour which had so long poisoned her mind,
straightway crossed the street and entered the house where she was
lodging. She had just returned from making several applications for
employment--futile, as so many were likely to be, if she persevered in
her search for a better place than the last. The wages due to her for
the present week she had of course sacrificed; her purchases of
clothing--essential and superfluous--had left only a small sum out of
her earnings. Food, fortunately, would cost her little; the difficulty,
indeed, was to eat anything at all.

She was exhausted after her long walk, and the scene with Sidney had
made her tremulous. In thrusting open the windows, as soon as she
entered, she broke a pane which was already cracked; the glass cut into
her palm, and blood streamed forth. For a moment she watched the red
drops falling to the floor, then began to sob miserably, almost as a
child might have done. The exertion necessary for binding the wound
seemed beyond her strength; sobbing and moaning, she stood in the same
attitude until the blood began to congeal. The tears, too, she let dry
unneeded upon her eyelashes and her cheeks; the mist with which for a
time they obscured her vision was nothing amid that cloud of misery
which blackened about her spirit as she brooded. The access of
self-pity was followed, as always, by a persistent sense of intolerable
wrong, and that again by a fierce desire to plunge herself into ruin,
as though by such act she could satiate her instincts of defiance. It
is a phase of exasperated egotism common enough in original natures
frustrated by circumstance--never so pronounced as in those who suffer
from the social disease. Such mood perverts everything to cause of
bitterness. The very force of sincerity, which Clara could not but
recognise in Kirkwood's appeal, inflamed the resentment she nourished
against him; she felt that to yield would be salvation and happiness,
yet yield she might not, and upon him she visited the anger due to the
evil impulses in her own heart. He spoke of her father, and in so doing
struck the only nerve in her which conveyed an emotion of tenderness;
instantly the feeling begot self-reproach, and of self-reproach was
born as quickly the harsh self-justification with which her pride ever
answered blame. She had made her father's life even more unhappy than
it need have been, and to be reminded of that only drove her more
resolutely upon the recklessness which would complete her ingratitude.

The afternoon wore away, the evening, a great part of the night. She
ate a few mouthfuls of bread, but could not exert herself to make tea.
It would be necessary to light a fire, and already the air of the room
was stifling.

After a night of sleeplessness, she could only lie on her bed through
the Sunday morning, wretched in a sense of abandonment. And then began
to assail her that last and subtlest of temptations, the thought that
already she had taken an irrevocable step, that an endeavour to return
would only be trouble spent in vain, that the easy course was, in
truth, the only one now open to her. Mrs. Tubbs was busy circulating
calumnies; that they were nothing more than calumnies could never be
proved; all who heard them would readily enough believe. Why should she
struggle uselessly to justify herself in the eyes of people predisposed
to condemn her? Fate was busy in all that had happened during the last
two days. Why had she quitted her situation at a moment's notice? Why
on this occasion rather than fifty times previously? It was not her own
doing; something impelled her, and the same force--call it chance or
destiny--would direct the issue once more. All she could foresee was
the keeping of her appointment with Scawthorne to-morrow morning; what
use to try and look further, when assuredly a succession of
circumstances impossible to calculate would in the end constrain her?
The best would be if she could sleep out the interval.

At mid-day she rose, ate and drank mechanically, then contemplated the
hours that must somehow be killed. There was sunlight in the sky, but
to what purpose should she go out? She went to the window, and surveyed
the portion of street that was visible. On the opposite pavement, at a
little distance, a man was standing; it was Sidney Kirkwood. The sight
of him roused her from apathy; her blood tingled, rushed into her
cheeks and throbbed at her temples. So, for all she had said, he was
daring to act the spy! He suspected her; he was lurking to surprise
visitors, to watch her outgoing and coming in. Very well; at least he
had provided her with occupation.

Five minutes later she saw that he had gone away. Thereupon--having in
the meantime clad herself--she left the house and walked at a quick
step towards a region of North London with which she had no
acquaintance. In an hour's time she had found another lodging, which
she took by the day only. Then back again to Islington. She told her
landlady that a sudden necessity compelled her to leave; she would have
a cab and remove her box at once. There was the hazard that Sidney
might return just as she was leaving; she braved it, and in another ten
minutes was out of reach. .

Let his be the blame. She had warned him, and he chose to disregard her
wish. Now she had cut the last bond that fretted her, and the hours
rushed on like a storm-wind driving her whither they would.

Her mind was relieved from the stress of conflict; despair had given
place to something that made her laugh at all the old scruples. So far
from dreading the judgments that would follow her disappearance, she
felt a pride in evil repute. Let them talk of her! If she dared
everything, it would be well understood that she had not done so
without a prospect worthy of herself. If she broke away from the
obligations of a life that could never be other than poor and
commonplace, those who knew her would estimate the compensation she had
found. Sidney Kirkwood was aware of her ambitions; for his own sake he
had hoped to keep her on the low level to which she was born; now let
him recognise his folly! Some day she would present herself before
him:--'Very sorry that I could not oblige you, my dear sir, but you see
that my lot was to be rather different from that you kindly planned for
me.' Let them gossip and envy!

It was a strange night that followed. Between one and two o'clock the
heavens began to be overflashed with summer lightning; there was no
thunder, no rain. The blue gleams kept illuminating the room for more
than an hour. Clara could not lie in bed. The activity of her brain
became all but delirium; along her nerves, through all the courses of
her blood, seemed to run fires which excited her with an indescribable
mingling of delight and torment. She walked to and fro, often speaking
aloud, throwing up her arms. She leaned from the open window and let
the lightning play freely upon her face: she fancied it had the effect
of restoring her wasted health. Whatever the cause, she felt stronger
and more free from pain than for many months.

At dawn she slept. The striking of a church-clock woke her at nine,
giving her just time to dress with care and set forth to keep her
appointment.




CHAPTER XI

A DISAPPOINTMENT

On ordinary Sundays the Byasses breakfasted at ten o'clock; this
morning the meal was ready at eight, and Bessie's boisterous spirits
declared the exception to be of joyous significance. Finding that
Samuel's repeated promises to rise were the merest evasion, she rushed
into the room where he lay fly-fretted, dragged the pillows from under
his tousled head, and so belaboured him in schoolboy fashion that he
had no choice but to leap towards his garments. In five minutes he
roared down the kitchen-stairs for shaving-water, and in five minutes
more was seated in his shirt-sleeves, consuming fried bacon with
prodigious appetite. Bessie had the twofold occupation of waiting upon
him and finishing the toilet of the baby; she talked incessantly and
laughed with an echoing shrillness which would have given a headache
for the rest of the day to any one of average nervous sensibility.

They were going to visit Samuel's parents, who lived at Greenwich.
Bessie had not yet enjoyed an opportunity of exhibiting her first-born
to the worthy couple; she had, however, written many and long letters
on the engrossing subject, and was just a little fluttered with natural
anxiety lest the infant's appearance or demeanour should disappoint the
expectations she had excited. Samuel found his delight in foretelling
the direst calamities.

'Don't say I didn't advise you to draw it mild,' he remarked whilst
breakfasting, when Bessie had for the tenth time obliged him to look
round and give his opinion on points of costume. 'Remember it was only
last week you told them that the imp had never cried since the day of
his birth, and I'll bet you three half-crowns to a bad halfpenny he
roars all through to-night.'

'Hold your tongue, Sam, or I'll throw something at you!'

Samuel had just appeased his morning hunger, and was declaring that the
day promised to be the hottest of the year, such a day as would bring
out every vice inherent in babies, when a very light tap at the door
caused Bessie to abandon her intention of pulling his ears.

'That's Jane,' she said. 'Come in!'

The Jane who presented herself was so strangely unlike her namesake who
lay ill at Mrs. Peckover's four months ago, that one who had not seen
her in the interval would with difficulty have recognised her. To begin
with, she had grown a little; only a little, but enough to give her the
appearance of her full thirteen years. Then her hair no longer
straggled in neglect, but was brushed very smoothly back from her
forehead, and behind was plaited in a coil of perfect neatness; one
could see now that it was soft, fine, mouse-coloured hair, such as
would tempt the fingers to the lightest caress. No longer were her
limbs huddled over with a few shapeless rags; she wore a full-length
dress of quiet grey, which suited well with her hair and the pale tones
of her complexion. As for her face--oh yes, it was still the good,
simple, unremarkable countenance, with the delicate arched eyebrows,
with the diffident lips, with the cheeks of exquisite smoothness, but
so sadly thin.

Here too, however, a noteworthy change was beginning to declare itself.
You were no longer distressed by the shrinking fear which used to be
her constant expression; her eyes no longer reminded you of a poor
animal that has been beaten from every place where it sought rest and
no longer expects anything but a kick and a curse. Timid they were,
drooping after each brief glance, the eyes of one who has suffered and
cannot but often brood over wretched memories, who does not venture to
look far forward lest some danger may loom inevitable--meet them for an
instant, however, and you saw that lustre was reviving in their still
depths, that a woman's soul had begun to manifest itself under the
shadow of those gently falling lids. A kind word, and with what purity
of silent gratitude the grey pupils responded! A merry word, and mark
if the light does not glisten on them, if the diffident lips do not
form a smile which you would not have more decided lest something of
its sweetness should be sacrificed.

'Now come and tell me what you think about baby,' cried Bessie. 'Will
he do? Don't pay any attention to my husband; he's a vulgar man!'

Jane stepped forward.

'I'm sure he looks very nice, Mrs. Byass.'

'Of course he does, bless him! Sam, get your coat on, and brush your
hat, and let Miss Snowdon teach you how to behave yourself. Well, we're
going to leave the house in your care, Jane. We shall be back _some
time_ to-morrow night, but goodness knows when. Don't you sit up for
us.'

'You know where to wire to if there's a fire breaks out in the back
kitchen,' observed Samuel facetiously. 'If you hear footsteps in the
passage at half-past two to-morrow morning don't trouble to come down;
wait till daylight to see whether they've carried off the dresser.'

Bessie screamed with laughter.

'What a fool you are, Sam! If you don't mind, you'll be making Jane
laugh. You're sure you'll be home before dark to-morrow, Jane?'

'Oh, quite sure. Mr. Kirkwood says there's a train gets to Liverpool
Street about seven, and grandfather thought that would suit us.'

'You'll be here before eight then. Do see that your fire's out before
you leave. And you'll be sure to pull the door to? And see that the
area-gate's fastened.'

'Can't you find a few more orders?' observed Samuel.

'Hold your tongue! Jane doesn't mind; do you, Jane? Now, Sam, are you
ready? Bless the man, if he hasn't got a great piece of bread sticking
in his whiskers! How _did_ it get there? Off you go!'

Jane followed them, and stood at the front door for a moment, watching
them as they departed.

Then she went upstairs. On the first floor the doors of the two rooms
stood open, and the rooms were bare. The lodgers who had occupied this
part of the house had recently left; a card was again hanging in the
window of Bessie's parlour. Jane passed up the succeeding flight and
entered the chamber which looked out upon Hanover Street. The
truckle-bed on which her grandfather slept had been arranged for the
day some two hours ago; Snowdon rose at six, and everything was orderly
in the room when Jane came to prepare breakfast an hour later. At
present the old man was sitting by the open window, smoking a pipe. He
spoke a few words with reference to the Byasses, then seemed to resume
a train of thought, and for a long time there was unbroken silence.
Jane seated herself at a table, on which were a few books and writing
materials. She began to copy something, using the pen with difficulty,
and taking extreme pains. Occasionally her eyes wandered, and once they
rested upon her grandfather's face for several minutes. But for the cry
of a milkman or a paper-boy in the street, no sound broke the quietness
of the summer morning. The blessed sunshine, so rarely shed from a
London sky--sunshine, the source of all solace to mind and
body--reigned gloriously in heaven and on earth.

When more than an hour had passed, Snowdon came and sat down beside the
girl. Without speaking she showed him what she had written. He nodded
approvingly.

'Shall I say it to you, grandfather?'

'Yes.'

Jane collected her thoughts, then began to repeat the parable of the
Samaritan. From the first words it was evident that she frequently thus
delivered passages committed to memory; evident, too, that instruction
and a natural good sense guarded her against the gabbling method of
recitation. When she had finished Snowdon spoke with her for awhile on
the subject of the story. In all he said there was the earnestness of
deep personal feeling. His theme was the virtue of Compassion; he
appeared to rate it above all other forms of moral goodness, to regard
it as the saving principle of human life.

'If only we had pity on one another, all the worst things we suffer
from in this world would be at an end. It's because men's hearts are
hard that life is so full of misery. If we could only learn to be kind
and gentle and forgiving--never mind anything else. We act as if we
were all each other's enemies; we can't be merciful, because we expect
no mercy; we struggle to get as much as we can for ourselves and care
nothing for others. Think about it; never let it go out of your mind.
Perhaps some day it'll help you in your own life.'

Then there was silence again. Snowdon went back to his seat by the
window and relit his pipe; to muse in the sunshine seemed sufficient
occupation for him. Jane opened another book and read to herself.

In the afternoon they went out together. The old man had grown more
talkative. He passed cheerfully from subject to subject, now telling a
story of his experiences abroad, now reviving recollections of London
as he had known it sixty years ago. Jane listened with quiet interest.
She did not say much herself, and when she did speak it was with a
noticeable effort to overcome her habit of diffidence. She was happy,
but her nature had yet to develop itself under these strangely novel
conditions.

A little before sunset there came a knocking at the house-door. Jane
went down to open, and found that the visitor was Sidney Kirkwood. The
joyful look with which she recognised him changed almost in the same
moment; his face wore an expression that alarmed her; it was stern,
hard-set in trouble, and his smile could not disguise the truth.
Without speaking, he walked upstairs and entered Snowdon's room. To
Sidney there was always something peculiarly impressive in the first
view of this quiet chamber; simple as were its appointments, it
produced a sense of remoteness from the common conditions of life.
Invariably he subdued his voice when conversing here. A few flowers
such as can be bought in the street generally diffused a slight scent
through the air, making another peculiarity which had its effect on
Sidney's imagination. When Jane moved about, it was with a soundless
step; if she placed a chair or arranged things on the table, it was as
if with careful avoidance of the least noise. When his thoughts turned
hitherwards, Sidney always pictured the old man sitting in his familiar
mood of reverie, and Jane, in like silence, bending over a book at the
table. Peace, the thing most difficult to find in the world that Sidney
knew, had here made itself a dwelling.

He shook hands with Snowdon and seated himself. A few friendly words
were spoken, and the old man referred to an excursion they had agreed
to make together on the morrow, the general holiday.

'I'm very sorry,' replied Kirkwood, 'but it'll be impossible for me to
go.'

Jane was standing near him; her countenance fell, expressing uttermost
disappointment.

'Something has happened,' pursued Sidney, 'that won't let me go away,
even for a few hours. I don't mean to say that it would really prevent
me, but I should be so uneasy in my mind all the time that I couldn't
enjoy myself, and I should only spoil your pleasure. Of course you'll
go just the same?'

Snowdon reassured him on this point. Jane had just been about to lay
supper; she continued her task, and Sidney made a show of sharing the
meal. Soon after, as if conscious that Sidney would speak with more
freedom of his trouble but for her presence, Jane bade them good-night
and went to her own room. There ensued a break in the conversation;
then Kirkwood said, with the abruptness of one who is broaching a
difficult subject:

'I should like to tell you what it is that's going wrong with me. I
don't think anyone's advice would be the least good, but it's a
miserable affair, and I shall feel better for speaking about it.'

Snowdon regarded him with eyes of calm sympathy. There is a look of
helpful attention peculiar to the faces of some who have known much
suffering; in this instance, the grave force of character which at all
times made the countenance impressive heightened the effect of its
gentleness. In external matters, the two men knew little more of each
other now than after their first meeting, but the spiritual alliance
between them had strengthened with every conversation. Each understood
the other's outlook upon problems of life, which are not commonly
discussed in the top rooms of lodging-houses; they felt and thought
differently at times, but in essentials they were at one, and it was
the first time that either had found such fruitful companionship.

'Did you hear anything from the Peckovers of Clara Hewett?' Sidney
began by asking.

'Not from them. Jane has often spoken of her.'

Sidney again hesitated, then, from a fragmentary beginning, passed into
a detailed account of his relations with Clara. The girl herself, had
she overheard him, could not have found fault with the way in which the
story was narrated. He represented his love as from the first without
response which could give him serious hope; her faults he dealt with
not as characteristics to be condemned, but as evidences of suffering,
the outcome of cruel conditions. Her engagement at the luncheon-bar he
spoke of as a detestable slavery, which had wasted her health and
driven her in the end to an act of desperation. What now could be done
to aid her? John Hewett was still in ignorance of the step she had
taken, and Sidney described himself as distracted by conflict between
what he felt to be his duty, and fear of what might happen if he
invoked Hewett's authority. At intervals through the day he had been
going backwards and forwards in the street where Clara had her lodging.
He did not think she would seek to escape from her friends altogether,
but her character and circumstances made it perilous for her to live
thus alone.

'What does she really wish for?' inquired Snowdon, when there had been
a short silence.

'She doesn't know, poor girl! Everything in the life she has been
living is hateful to her--everything since she left school. She can't
rest in the position to which she was born; she aims at an impossible
change of circumstances. It comes from her father; she can't help
rebelling against what seem to her unjust restraints. But what's to
come of it? She may perhaps get a place in a large restaurant--and what
does that mean?'

He broke off, but in a moment resumed even more passionately:

'What a vile, cursed world this is, where you may see men and women
perish before your eyes, and no more chance of saving them than if they
were going down in mid-ocean! She's only a child--only just
seventeen--and already she's gone through a lifetime of miseries. And
I, like a fool, I've often been angry with her; I was angry yesterday.
How can she help her nature? How can we any of us help what we're
driven to in a world like this? Clara isn't made to be one of those who
slave to keep themselves alive. Just a chance of birth! Suppose she'd
been the daughter of a rich man; then everything we now call a fault in
her would either have been of no account or actually a virtue. Just
because we haven't money we may go to perdition, and comfortable people
tell us we've only ourselves to blame. Put _them_ in our place!'

Snowdon's face had gone through various changes as Sidney flung out his
vehement words. When he spoke, it was in a tone of some severity.

'Has she no natural affection for her father? Does she care nothing for
what trouble she brings him?'

Sidney did not reply at once; as he was about to speak, Snowdon bent
forward suddenly and touched his arm.

'Let me see her. Let me send Jane to her to-morrow morning, and ask her
to come here. I might--I can't say--but I might do some good.'

To this Sidney gave willing assent, but without sanguine expectation.
In further talk it was agreed between them that, if this step had no
result, John Hewett ought to be immediately informed of the state of
things.

This was at ten o'clock on Sunday evening. So do we play our
tragi-comedies in the eye of fate.

The mention of Jane led to a brief conversation regarding her before
Sidney took his leave. Since her recovery she had been going regularly
to school, to make up for the time of which she had been defrauded by
Mrs. Peckover. Her grand-father's proposal was, that she should
continue thus for another six months, after which, he said, it would be
time for her to learn a business. Mrs. Byass had suggested the choice
of artificial-flower making, to which she herself had been brought up;
possibly that would do as well as anything else.

'I suppose so,' was Sidney's reluctant acquiescence. 'Or as ill as
anything else, would be a better way to put it.'

Snowdon regarded him with unusual fixedness, and seemed on the point of
making some significant remark; but immediately his face expressed
change of purpose, and he said, without emphasis:

'Jane must be able to earn her own living.'

Sidney, before going home, walked round to the street in which he had
already lingered several times to-day, and where yesterday he had
spoken with Clara. The windows of the house he gazed at were dark.




CHAPTER XII

'IO SATURNALIA!'

So at length came Monday, the first Monday in August, a day gravely set
apart for the repose and recreation of multitudes who neither know how
to rest nor how to refresh themselves with pastime. To-day will the
slaves of industrialism don the _pileus_. It is high summertide. With
joy does the awaking publican look forth upon the blue-misty heavens,
and address his adorations to the Sun-god, inspirer of thirst. Throw
wide the doors of the temple of Alcohol! Behold, we come in our
thousands, jingling the coins that shall purchase us this one day of
tragical mirth. Before us is the dark and dreary autumn; it is a far
cry to the foggy joys of Christmas. Io Saturnalia!

For certain friends of ours this morning brought an event of
importance. At a church in Clerkenwell were joined together in holy
matrimony Robert Hewett and Penelope (otherwise Pennyloaf) Candy, the
former aged nineteen, the latter less than that by nearly three years.
John Hewett would have nothing to do with an alliance so disreputable;
Mrs. Hewett had in vain besought her stepson not to marry so
unworthily. Even as a young man of good birth has been known to enjoy a
subtle self-flattery in the thought that he graciously bestows his name
upon a maiden who, to all intents and purposes, may be said never to
have been born at all, so did Bob Hewett feel when he put a ring upon
the scrubby finger of Pennyloaf. Proudly conscious was Bob that he a
'married beneath him'--conscious also that Clem Peckover was gnawing
her lips in rage.

Mrs. Candy was still sober at the hour of the ceremony. Her husband,
not a bad fellow in his way, had long since returned to her, and as yet
had not done more than threaten a repetition of his assault. Both were
present at church. A week ago Bob had established himself in a room in
Shooter's Gardens, henceforth to be shared with him by his bride.
Probably he might have discovered a more inviting abode for the early
days of married life, but Bob had something of the artist's temperament
and could not trouble about practical details; for the present this
room would do as well as another. It was cheap, and he had need of all
the money he could save from everyday expenses. Pennyloaf would go en
with her shirt-making, of course, and all they wanted was a roof over
their heads at night.

And in truth he was fond of Pennyloaf. The poor little slave worshipped
him so sincerely; she repaid his affectionate words with such fervent
gratitude; and there was no denying that she had rather a pretty face,
which had attracted him from the first. But above all, this preference
accorded to so humble a rival had set Clem Peckover beside herself. It
was all very well for Clem to make pretence of having transferred her
affections to Jack Bartley. Why, Suke Jollop (ostensibly Clem's bosom
friend, but treacherous at times because she had herself given an eye
to Jack)--Suke Jollop reported that Clem would have killed Pennyloaf
had she dared. Pennyloaf had been going about in fear for her life
since that attack upon her in Myddelton Passage. 'I dursn't marry you,
Bob! I dursn't!' she kept saying, when the proposal was first made. But
Bob laughed with contemptuous defiance. He carried his point, and now
he was going to spend his wedding-day at the Crystal Palace--choosing
that resort because he knew Clem would be there, and Jack Bartley, and
Suke Jollop, and many another acquaintance, before whom he was resolved
to make display of magnanimity.

Pennyloaf shone in most unwonted apparel. Everything was new except her
boots--it had been decided that these only needed soleing. Her
broad-brimmed hat of yellow straw was graced with the reddest feather
purchasable in the City Road; she had a dolman of most fashionable cut,
blue, lustrous; blue likewise was her dress, hung about with bows and
streamers. And the gleaming ring on the scrubby small finger! On that
hand most assuredly Pennyloaf would wear no glove. How proud she was of
her ring! How she turned it round and round when nobody was looking!
Gold, Pennyloaf, real gold! The pawnbroker would lend her
seven-and-sixpence on it, any time.

At Holborn Viaduct there was a perpetual rush of people for the trains
to the 'Paliss.' As soon as a train was full, off it went, and another
long string of empty carriages drew up in its place. No distinction
between 'classes' to-day; get in where you like, where you can.
Positively, Pennyloaf found herself seated in a first-class carriage;
she would have been awe-struck, but that Bob flung himself back on the
cushions with such an easy air, and nodded laughingly at her. Among
their companions was a youth with a concertina; as soon as the train
moved he burst into melody. It was the natural invitation to song, and
all joined in the latest ditties learnt at the music-hall. Away they
sped, over the roofs of South London, about them the universal glare of
sunlight, the carriage dense with tobacco-smoke. He for the bottle of
muddy ale, passed round in genial fellowship from mouth to mouth!
Pennyloaf would not drink of it; she had a dread of all such bottles.
In her heart she rejoiced that Bob knew no craving for strong liquor.
Towards the end of the journey the young man with the concertina passed
round his hat.

Clem Peckover had come by the same train; she was one of a large party
which had followed close behind Bob and Pennyloaf to the railway
station. Now they followed along the long corridors into the 'Paliss,'
with many a loud expression of mockery, with hee-hawing laughter, with
coarse jokes. Depend upon it, Clem was gorgeously arrayed; amid her
satellites she swept on 'like a stately ship of Tarsus, bound for the
isles of Javan or Gadire;' her face was aflame, her eyes flashed in
enjoyment of the uproar. Jack Bartley wore a high hat--Bob never had
owned one in his life--and about his neck was a tie of crimson; yellow
was his waistcoat, even such a waistcoat as you may see in Pall Mall,
and his walking-stick had a nigger's head for handle. He was the oracle
of the maidens around him; every moment the appeal was to 'Jeck! Jeck!'
Suke Jollop, who would in reality have preferred to accompany Bob and
his allies, whispered it about that Jack had two-pound-ten in his
pocket, and was going to spend every penny of it before he left the
'Paliss'--yes, 'every bloomin' penny!'

Thus early in the day, the grounds were of course preferred to the
interior of the glass house. Bob and Pennyloaf bent their steps to the
fair. Here already was gathered much goodly company; above their heads
hung a thick white wavering cloud of dust. Swing-boats and
merry-go-rounds are from of old the chief features of these rural
festivities; they soared and dipped and circled to the joyous music of
organs which played the same tune automatically for any number of
hours, whilst raucous voices invited all and sundry to take their turn.
Should this delight pall, behold on every hand such sports as are
dearest to the Briton, those which call for strength of sinew and
exactitude of aim. The philosophic mind would have noted with interest
how ingeniously these games were made to appeal to the patriotism of
the throng. Did you choose to 'shy' sticks in the contest for
cocoa-nuts, behold your object was a wooden model of the treacherous
Afghan or the base African. If you took up the mallet to smite upon a
spring and make proof of how far you could send a ball flying upwards,
your blow descended upon the head of some other recent foeman. Try your
fist at the indicator of muscularity, and with zeal you smote full in
the stomach of a guy made to represent a Russian. If you essayed the
pop-gun, the mark set you was on the flank of a wooden donkey, so
contrived that it would kick when hit in the true spot. What a joy to
observe the tendency of all these diversions! How characteristic of a
high-spirited people that nowhere could be found any amusement
appealing to the mere mind, or calculated to effeminate by encouraging
a love of beauty.

Bob had a sovereign to get rid of. He shied for cocoa-nuts, he swung in
the boat with Pennyloaf, he rode with her on the whirligigs. When they
were choked, and whitened from head to foot, with dust, it was natural
to seek the nearest refreshment-booth. Bob had some half-dozen male and
female acquaintances clustered about him by now; of course. He must
celebrate the occasion by entertaining all of them. Consumed with
thirst, he began to drink without counting the glasses. Pennyloaf
plucked at his elbow, but Bob was beginning to feel that he must
display spirit. Because he was married, that was no reason for his
relinquishing the claims to leadership in gallantry which had always
been recognised. Hollo! Here was Suke Jollop! She had just quarrelled
with Clem, and had been searching for the hostile camp. 'Have a drink,
Suke!' cried Bob, when he heard her acrimonious charges against Clem
and Jack. A pretty girl, Suke, and with a hat which made itself proudly
manifest a quarter of a mile away. Drink! of course she would drink;
that thirsty she could almost drop! Bob enjoyed this secession from the
enemy. He knew Suke's old fondness for him, and began to play upon it.
Elated with beer and vanity, he no longer paid the least attention to
Pennyloaf's remonstrances; nay, he at length bade her 'hold her
bloomin' row!' Pennyloaf had a tear in her eye; she looked fiercely at
Miss Jollop.

The day wore on. For utter weariness Pennyloaf was constrained to beg
that they might go into the 'Paliss' and find a shadowed seat. Her tone
revived tenderness in Bob; again he became gracious, devoted; he
promised that not another glass of beer should pass his lips, and Sake
Jollop, with all her like, might go to perdition. But heavens! how
sweltering it was under this glass canopy. How the dust rose from the
trampled boards! Come, let's have tea. The programme says there'll be a
military band playing presently, and we shall return refreshed to hear
it.

So they made their way to the 'Shilling Tea-room.' Having paid at the
entrance, they were admitted to feed freely on all that lay before
them. With difficulty could a seat be found in the huge room; the
uproar of voices was deafening. On the tables lay bread, butter, cake
in hunches, tea-pots, milk-jugs, sugar-basins--all things to whomso
could secure them in the conflict. Along the gangways coursed
perspiring waiters, heaping up giant structures of used plates and
cups, distributing clean utensils, and miraculously sharp in securing
the gratuity expected from each guest as he rose satiate. Muscular men
in aprons wheeled hither the supplies of steaming fluid in immense cans
on heavy trucks. Here practical joking found the most graceful of
opportunities, whether it were the deft direction of a piece of cake at
the nose of a person sitting opposite, or the emptying of a saucer down
your neighbour's back, or the ingenious jogging of an arm which was in
the act of raising a full tea-cup. Now and then an ill-conditioned
fellow, whose beer disagreed with him, would resent some piece of
elegant trifling, and the waiters would find it needful to request
gentlemen not to fight until they had left the room. These cases,
however, were exceptional. On the whole there reigned a spirit of
imbecile joviality. Shrieks of female laughter testified to the success
of the entertainment.

As Bob and his companion quitted this sphere of delight, ill-luck
brought it to pass that Mr. Jack Bartley and his train were on the
point of entering. Jack uttered a phrase of stinging sarcasm with
reference to Pennyloaf's red feather; whereupon Bob smote him exactly
between the eyes. Yells arose; there was a scuffle, a rush, a tumult.
The two were separated before further harm came of the little
misunderstanding, but Jack went to the tea-tables vowing vengeance.

Poor Pennyloaf shed tears as Bob led her to the place where the band
had begun playing. Only her husband's anger prevented her from yielding
to utter misery. But now they had come to the centre of the building,
and by dint of much struggle in the crowd they obtained a standing
whence they could see the vast amphitheatre, filled with thousands of
faces. Here at length was quietness, intermission of folly and
brutality. Bob became another man as he stood and listened. He looked
with kindness into Pennyloaf's pale, weary face, and his arm stole
about her waist to support her. Ha! Pennyloaf was happy! The last trace
of tears vanished. She too was sensible of the influences of music; her
heart throbbed as she let herself lean against her husband.

Well, as every one must needs have his panacea for the ills of society,
let me inform you of mine. To humanise the multitude two things are
necessary--two things of the simplest kind conceivable. In the first
place, you must effect an entire change of economic conditions: a
preliminary step of which every tyro will recognise the easiness; then
you must bring to bear on the new order of things the constant
influence of music. Does not the prescription recommend itself? It is
jesting in earnest. For, work as you will, there is no chance of a new
and better world until the old be utterly destroyed. Destroy, sweep
away, prepare the ground; then shall music the holy, music the
civiliser, breathe over the renewed earth, and with Orphean magic raise
in perfected beauty the towers of the City of Man.

Hours yet before the fireworks begin. Never mind; here by good luck we
find seats where we can watch the throng passing and repassing. It is a
great review of the People. On the whole how respectable they are, how
sober, how deadly dull! See how worn-out the poor girls are becoming,
how they gape, what listless eyes most of them have! The stoop in the
shoulders so universal among them merely means over-toil in the
workroom. Not one in a thousand shows the elements of taste in dress;
vulgarity and worse glares in all but every costume. Observe the
middle-aged women; it would be small surprise that their good looks had
vanished, but whence comes it they are animal, repulsive, absolutely
vicious in ugliness? Mark the men in their turn: four in every six have
visages so deformed by ill-health that they excite disgust; their hair
is cut down to within half an inch of the scalp; their legs are twisted
out of shape by evil conditions of life from birth upwards. Whenever a
youth and a girl come along arm-in-arm, how flagrantly shows the man's
coarseness! They are pretty, so many of these girls, delicate of
feature, graceful did but their slavery allow them natural development;
and the heart sinks as one sees them side by side with the men who are
to be their husbands.

One of the livelier groups is surging hitherwards; here we have frolic,
here we have humour. The young man who leads them has been going about
all day with the lining of his hat turned down over his forehead; for
the thousandth time those girls are screaming with laughter at the
sight of him. Ha, ha! He has slipped and fallen upon the floor, and
makes an obstruction; his companions treat him like a horse that is
'down' in the street. 'Look out for his 'eels!' cries one; and another,
'Sit on his 'ed!' If this doesn't come to an end we shall die of
laughter. Lot one of the funniest of the party is wearing a gigantic
cardboard nose and flame-coloured whiskers. There, the stumbler is on
his feet again. ''Ere he comes up smilin'!' cries his friend of the
cardboard nose, and we shake our diaphragms with mirth. One of the
party is an unusually tall man. 'When are you comin' down to have a
look at us?' cries a pert lass as she skips by him.

A great review of the People. Since man came into being did the world
ever exhibit a sadder spectacle?

Evening advances; the great ugly building will presently be lighted
with innumerable lamps. Away to the west yonder the heavens are afire
with sunset, but at that we do not care to look; never in our lives did
we regard it. We know not what is meant by beauty or grandeur. Here
under the glass roof stand white forms of undraped men and women--casts
of antique statues--but we care as little for the glory of art as for
that of nature; we have a vague feeling that, for some reason or other,
antiquity excuses the indecent, but further than that we do not get.

As the dusk descends there is a general setting of the throng towards
the open air; all the pathways swarm with groups which have a tendency
to disintegrate into couples; universal is the protecting arm. Relief
from the sweltering atmosphere of the hours of sunshine causes a
revival of hilarity; those who have hitherto only bemused themselves
with liquor now pass into the stage of jovial recklessness, and others,
determined to prolong a flagging merriment, begin to depend upon their
companions for guidance. On the terraces dancing has commenced; the
players of violins, concertinas, and penny-whistles do a brisk trade
among the groups eager for a rough-and-tumble valse; so do the
pickpockets. Vigorous and varied is the jollity that occupies the
external galleries, filling now in expectation of the fireworks;
indescribable the mingled tumult that roars heavenwards. Girls linked
by the half-dozen arm-in-arm leap along with shrieks like grotesque
maenads; a rougher horseplay finds favour among the youths,
occasionally leading to fisticuffs. Thick voices bellow in fragmentary
chorus; from every side comes the yell, the eat-call, the ear-rending
whistle; and as the bass, the never-ceasing accompaniment, sounds
myriad-footed tramp, tramp along the wooden flooring. A fight, a scene
of bestial drunkenness, a tender whispering between two lovers, proceed
concurrently in a space of five square yards.--Above them glimmers the
dawn of starlight.

For perhaps the first time in his life Bob Hewett has drunk more than
he can well carry. To Pennyloaf's remonstrances he answers more and
more impatiently: 'Why does she talk like a bloomin' fool?--one doesn't
get married every day.' He is on the look-out for Jack Bartley now;
only let him meet Jack, and it shall be seen who is the better man.
Pennyloaf rejoices that the hostile party are nowhere discoverable. She
is persuaded to join in a dance, though every moment it seems to her
that she must sink to the ground in uttermost exhaustion. Naturally she
does not dance with sufficient liveliness to please Bob; he seizes
another girl, a stranger, and whirls round the six-foot circle with a
laugh of triumph. Pennyloaf's misery is relieved by the beginning of
the fireworks. Up shoot the rockets, and all the reeking multitude
utters a huge 'Oh' of idiot admiration.

Now at length must we think of tearing ourselves away from these
delights. Already the more prudent people are hurrying to the railway,
knowing by dire experience what it means to linger until the last
cargoes. Pennyloaf has hard work to get her husband as far as the
station; Bob is not quite steady upon his feet, and the hustling of the
crowd perpetually excites him to bellicose challenges. They reach the
platform somehow; they stand wedged amid a throng which roars
persistently as a substitute for the activity of limb Row become
impossible. A train is drawing up slowly; the danger is lest people in
the front row should be pushed over the edge of the platform, but
porters exert themselves with success. A rush, a tumble, curses, blows,
laughter, screams of pain--and we are in a carriage. Pennyloaf has to
be dragged up from under the seat, and all her indignation cannot free
her from the jovial embrace of a man who insists that there is plenty
of room on his knee. Off we go! It is a long third-class coach, and
already five or six musical instruments have struck up. We smoke and
sing at the same time; we quarrel and make love--the latter in somewhat
primitive fashion; we roll about with the rolling of the train; we nod
into hoggish sleep.

The platform at Holborn Viaduct; and there, to Pennyloaf's terror, it
is seen that Clem Peckover and her satellites have come by the same
train. She does her best to get Bob quickly away, but Clem keeps close
in their neighbourhood. Just as they issue from the station Pennyloaf
feels herself bespattered from head to foot with some kind of fluid;
turning, she is aware that all her enemies have squirts in their hands,
and are preparing for a second discharge of filthy water. Anguish for
the ruin of her dress overcomes all other fear; she calls upon Bob to
defend her.

But an immediate conflict was not Jack Bartley's intention. He and
those with him made off at a run, Bob pursuing as closely as his
unsteadiness would permit. In this way they all traversed the short
distance to Clerkenwell Green, either party echoing the other's
objurgations along the thinly-peopled streets. At length arrived the
suitable moment. Near St. James's Church Jack Bartley made a stand, and
defied his enemy to come on. Bob responded with furious eagerness; amid
a press of delighted spectators, swelled by people just turned out of
the public-houses, the two lads fought like wild animals. Nor were they
the only combatants. Exasperated by the certainty that her hat and
dolman were ruined, Pennyloaf flew with erected nails at Clem Peckover.
It was just what the latter desired. In an instant she had rent half
Pennyloaf's garments off her back, and was tearing her face till the
blood streamed. Inconsolable was the grief of the crowd when a couple
of stalwart policemen came hustling forward, thrusting to left and
right, irresistibly clearing the corner. There was no question of
making arrests; it was the night of Bank-holiday, and the capacity of
police-cells is limited. Enough that the fight perforce came to an end.
Amid frenzied blasphemy Bob and Jack went their several ways; so did
Clem and Pennyloaf.

Poor Pennyloaf! Arrived at Shooter's Gardens, and having groped her way
blindly up to the black hole which was her wedding-chamber, she just
managed to light a candle, then sank down upon the bare floor and wept.
You could not have recognised her; her pretty face was all blood and
dirt. She held in her hand the fragment of a hat, and her dolman had
disappeared. Her husband was not in much better plight; his waistcoat
and shirt were rent open, his coat was filth-smeared, and it seemed
likely that he had lost the sight of one eye. Sitting there in drunken
lassitude, he breathed nothing but threats of future vengeance.

An hour later noises of a familiar kind sounded beneath the window. A
woman's voice was raised in the fury of mad drunkenness, and a man
answered her with threats and blows.

'That's mother,' sobbed Pennyloaf. 'I knew she wouldn't get over
to-day. She never did get over a Bank-holiday.'

Mrs. Candy had taken the pledge when her husband consented to return
and live with her. Unfortunately she did not at the same time transfer
herself to a country where there are no beer-shops and no
Bank-holidays. Short of such decisive change, what hope for her?

Bob was already asleep, breathing stertorously. As for Pennyloaf, she
was so overwearied that hours passed before oblivion fell upon her
aching eyelids. She was thinking all the time that on the morrow it
would be necessary to pawn her wedding-ring.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BRINGER OF ILL NEWS

Knowing the likelihood that Clara Hewett would go from home for
Bank-holiday, Sidney made it his request before he left Hanover Street
on Sunday night that Jane might be despatched on her errand at an early
hour next morning. At eight o'clock, accordingly, Snowdon went forth
with his granddaughter, and, having discovered the street to which
Sidney had directed him, he waited at a distance whilst Jane went to
make her inquiries. In a few minutes the girl rejoined him.

'Miss Hewett has gone away,' she reported.

'To spend the day, do you mean?' was Snowdon's troubled question.

'No, she has left the house. She went yesterday, in the afternoon. It
was very sudden, the landlady says, and she doesn't know where she's
gone to.'

Jane had no understanding of what her information implied; seeing that
it was received as grave news, she stood regarding her grandfather
anxiously. Though Clara had passed out of her world since those first
days of illness, Jane held her in a memory which knew no motive of
retention so strong as gratitude. The thought of harm or sorrow coming
upon her protector had a twofold painfulness. Instantly she divined
that Clara was in some way the cause of Sidney Kirkwood's inability to
go into the country to-day. For a long time the two had been closely
linked in her reflections; Mrs. Peckover and Clem used constantly to
exchange remarks which made this inevitable. But not until now had Jane
really felt the significance of the bond. Of a sudden she had a
throbbing at her heart, and a confusion of mind which would not allow
her to pursue the direct train of thought naturally provoked by the
visit she had just paid. A turbid flood of ideas, of vague surmises, of
apprehensions, of forecasts, swept across her consciousness. The blood
forsook her cheeks. But that the old man began to move away, she could
have remained thus for many minutes, struggling with that new,
half-understood thing which was taking possession of her life.

The disappointment of the day was no longer simple, and such as a child
experiences. Nor ever from this hour onwards would Jane regard things
as she had been wont to do, with the simple feelings of childhood.

Snowdon walked on in silence until the street they had visited was far
behind them. Jane was accustomed to his long fits of musing, but now
she with difficulty refrained from questioning him. He said at length:

'Jane, I'm afraid we shall have to give up our day in the country.'

She assented readily, gladly; all the joy had gone out of the proposed
excursion, and she wished Dow to be by herself in quietness.

'I think I'll let you go home alone,' Snowdon continued. 'I want to see
Mr. Kirkwood, and I dare say I shall find him in, if I walk on at once.'

They went in different directions, and Snowdon made what speed he could
to Tysoe Street. Sidney had already been out, walking restlessly and
aimlessly for two or three hours. The news he now heard was the
half-incredible fulfilment of a dread that had been torturing him
through the night. No calamity is so difficult to realise when it
befalls as one which has haunted us in imagination.

'That means nothing!' he exclaimed, as if resentfully. 'She was
dissatisfied with the lodging, that's all. Perhaps she's already got a
place. I dare say there's a note from her at home this morning.'

'Shall you go and see if there is?' asked Snowdon, allowing, as usual,
a moment's silence to intervene.

Sidney hesitated, avoiding the other's look.

'I shall go to that house first of all, I think. Of course I shall hear
no more than they told Jane; but--'

He took a deep breath.

'Yes, go there,' said Snowdon; 'but afterwards go to the Hewetts'. If
she _hasn't_ written to them, or let them have news of any kind, her
father oughtn't to be kept in ignorance for another hour.'

'He ought to have been told before this,' replied Sidney ill a thick
under-voice. 'He ought to have been told on Saturday. And the blame'll
be mine.'

It is an experience familiar to impulsive and self-confident men that a
moment's crisis may render scarcely intelligible a mode of thought or
course of action which till then one had deemed perfectly rational.
Sidney, hopeless in spite of the pretences he made, stood aghast at the
responsibility he had taken upon himself. It was so obvious to him now
that he ought to have communicated to John Hewett without loss of time
the news which Mrs. Hewett brought on Saturday morning. But could he be
sure that John was still in ignorance of Clara's movements? Was it not
all but certain that Mrs. Hewett must have broken the news before this?
If not, there lay before him a terrible duty.

The two went forth together, and another visit was paid to the
lodging-house. After that Sidney called upon Mrs. Tubbs, and made a
simple inquiry for Clara, with the anticipated result.

'You won't find her in this part of London, it's my belief,' said the
woman significantly. 'She's left the lodgings as she took--so much I
know. Never meant to stay there, not she! You're a friend of her
father's, mister?'

Sidney could not trust himself to make a reply. He rejoined Snowdon at
a little distance, and expressed his intention of going at once to
Clerkenwell Close.

'Let me see you again to-day,' said the old man sadly.

Sidney promised, and they took leave of each other. It was now nearing
ten o'clock. In the Close an organ was giving delight to a great crowd
of children, some of them wearing holiday garb, but most clad in the
native rags which served them for all seasons and all days. The volume
of clanging melody fell with torture upon Kirkwood's ear, and when he
saw that the instrument was immediately before Mrs. Peckover's house,
he stood aside in gloomy impatience, waiting till it should move away.
This happened in a few minutes. The house door being open, he walked
straight upstairs.

On the landing he confronted Mrs. Hewett; she started on seeing him,
