and whispered a question. The exchange of a few words apprised Sidney
that Hewett did not even know of Clara's having quitted Mrs. Tubbs'.

'Then I must tell him everything,' he said. To put the task upon the
poor woman would have been simple cowardice. Merely in hearing his news
she was blanched with dread. She could only point to the door of the
front room--the only one rented by the family since Jane Snowdon's
occupation of the other had taught them to be as economical in this
respect as their neighbours were.

Sidney knocked and entered. Two months had passed since his latest
visit, and he observed that in the meantime everything had become more
squalid. The floor, the window, the furniture, were not kept so clean
as formerly--inevitable result of the overcrowding of a room; the air
was bad, the children looked untidy. The large bed had not been set in
order since last night; in it lay the baby, crying as always, ailing as
it had done from the day of its birth. John Hewett was engaged in
mending one of the chairs, of which the legs had become loose. He
looked with surprise at the visitor, and at once averted his face
sullenly.

'Mr. Hewett,' Kirkwood began, without form of greeting, 'on Saturday
morning I heard something that I believe I ought to have let you know
at once. I felt, though, that it was hardly my business; and somehow we
haven't been quite so open with each other just lately as we used to
be.'

His voice sank. Hewett had risen from his crouching attitude, and was
looking him full in the face with eyes which grew momentarily darker
and more hostile.

'Well? Why are you stopping? What have you got to say?'

The words came from a dry throat; the effort to pronounce them clearly
made the last all but violent.

'On Friday night,' Sidney resumed, his own utterance uncertain, 'Clara
left her place. She took a room not far from Upper Street, and I saw
her, spoke to her. She'd quarrelled with Mrs. Tubbs. I urged her to
come home, but she wouldn't listen to me. This morning I've been to try
and see her again, but they tell me she went away yesterday afternoon.
I can't find where she's living now.'

Hewett took a step forward. His face was so distorted, so fierce, that
Sidney involuntarily raised an arm, as if to defend himself.

'An' it's you as comes tellin' me this!' John exclaimed, a note of
anguish blending with his fury. 'You have the face to stand there an'
speak like that to me, when you know it's all your own doing! Who was
the cause as the girl went away from 'ome? Who was it, I say? Haven't
been as friendly as we used to be, haven't we? An' why? Haven't I seen
it plainer an' plainer what you was thinkin' when you told me to let
her have her own way? I spoke the truth then--'cause I felt it; an' I
was fool enough, for all that, to try an' believe I was in the wrong.
Now you come an' stand before me--why, I couldn't a' thought there was
a man had so little shame in him!'

Mrs. Hewett entered the room; the loud angry voice had reached her
ears, and in spite of terror she came to interpose between the two men.

'Do you know what he's come to tell me?' cried her husband. 'Oh, you
do! He's been tryin' to talk you over, has he? You just answer to me,
an' tell the truth. Who was it persuaded me to let Clara go from 'ome?
Who was it come here an' talked an' talked till he got his way? He knew
what 'ud be the end of it--he knew, I tell you,--an' it's just what he
wanted. Hasn't he been drawin' away from us ever since the girl left? I
saw it all that night when he came here persuadin' me, an' I told it
him plain. He wanted to 'a done with her, and to a' done with us. Am I
speakin' the truth or not?'

'Why should he think that way, John?' pleaded the woman faintly. 'You
know very well as Clara 'ud never listen to him. What need had he to do
such things?'

'Oh yes, I'm wrong! Of course I'm wrong! You always did go against me
when there was anything to do with Clara. She'd never listen to him?
No, of course she wouldn't, an' he couldn't rest until he saw her come
to harm. What do _you_ care either? She's no child of yours. But I tell
you I'd see you an' all your children beg an' die in the streets rather
than a hair of my own girl's head should be touched!'

Indulgence of his passion was making a madman of him. Never till now
had he uttered an unfeeling word to his wife, but the look with which
lie accompanied this brutal speech was one of fiery hatred.

'Don't turn on _her_!' cried Sidney, with bitterness. 'Say what you
like to me, and believe the worst you can of me; I shouldn't have come
here if I hadn't been ready to bear everything. It's no good speaking
reason to you now, but maybe you'll understand some day.'

'Who know's as she's come to harm?' urged Mrs. Hewett. 'Nobody can say
it of her for certain, yet.'

'I'd have told him that, if he'd only listened to me and given me
credit for honesty,' said Kirkwood. 'It is as likely as not she's gone
away just because I angered her on Saturday. Perhaps she said to
herself she'd have done with me once for all. It would be just her way.'

'Speak another word against my girl,' Hewett shouted, misinterpreting
the last phrase, 'an' I'll do more than say what I think of you--old
man though they call me! Take yourself out of this room; it was the
worst day of my life that ever you came into it. Never let me an' you
come across each other again. I hate the sight of you, an' I hate the
sound of your voice!'

The animal in Sidney Kirkwood made it a terrible minute for him as he
turned away in silence before this savage injustice. The veins upon his
forehead were swollen; his clenched teeth gave an appearance of
ferocity to his spirited features. With head bent, and shoulders
quivering as if in supreme muscular exertion, he left the room without
another word.

In a few minutes Hewett also quitted the house. He went to the
luncheon-bar in Upper Street, and heard for the first time Mrs. Tubbs's
rancorous surmises. He went to Clara's recent lodgings; a girl of ten
was the only person in the house, and she could say nothing more than
that Miss Hewett no longer lived there. Till midway in the afternoon
John walked about the streets of Islington, Highbury, Hoxton,
Clerkenwell, impelled by the unreasoning hope that he might see Clara,
but also because he could not rest in any place. He was half-conscious
now of the madness of his behaviour to Kirkwood, but this only
confirmed him in hostility to the young man; the thought of losing
Clara was anguish intolerable, yet with it mingled a bitter resentment
of the girl's cruelty to him. And all these sources of misery swelled
the current of rebellious feeling which had so often threatened to
sweep his life into wreckage. He was Clara's father, and the same
impulse of furious revolt which had driven the girl to recklessness now
inflamed him with the rage of despair.

On a Bank-holiday only a few insignificant shops remain open even in
the poor districts of London; sweets you can purchase, and tobacco, but
not much else that is sold across an ordinary counter. The more
noticeable becomes the brisk trade of public-houses. At the gin-shop
centres the life of each street; here is a wide door and a noisy
welcome, the more attractive by contrast with the stretch of closed
shutters on either hand. At such a door, midway in the sultry
afternoon, John Hewett paused. To look at his stooping shoulders, his
uncertain swaying this way and that, his flushed, perspiring face, you
might have taken him for one who had already been drinking. No; it was
only a struggle between his despairing wretchedness and a lifelong
habit of mind. Not difficult to foresee which would prevail; the
public-house always has its doors open in expectation of such
instances. With a gesture which made him yet more like a drunken man he
turned from the pavement and entered. . . .

About nine o'clock in the evening, just when Mrs. Hewett had put the
unwilling children to bed, and had given her baby a sleeping-dose--it
had cried incessantly for eighteen hours,--the door of the room was
pushed open. Her husband came in. She stood looking at him--unable to
credit the evidence of her eyes.

'John!'

She laid her hand upon him and stared into his face. The man shook her
off, without speaking, and moved staggeringly forward. Then he turned
round, waved his arm, and shouted:

'Let her go to the devil. She cares nothing for her father.'

He threw himself upon the bed, and soon sank into drunken sleep.




CHAPTER XIV

A WELCOME GUEST

The bells of St. James's, Clerkenwell, ring melodies in intervals of
the pealing for service-time. One morning of spring their music, like
the rain that fell intermittently, was flung westwards by the
boisterous wind, away over Clerkenwell Close, until the notes failed
one by one, or were clashed out of existence by the clamour of a less
civilised steeple. Had the wind been under mortal control it would
doubtless have blown thus violently and in this quarter in order that
the inhabitants of the House of Detention might derive no solace from
the melody. Yet I know not; just now the bells were playing 'There is a
happy land, far, far away,' and that hymn makes too great a demand upon
the imagination to soothe amid instant miseries.

In Mrs. Peckover's kitchen the music was audible in bursts. Clem and
her mother, however, it neither summoned to prepare for church, nor
lulled into a mood of restful reverie. The two were sitting very close
together before the fire, and holding intimate converse; their voices
kept a low murmur, as if; though the door was shut, they felt it
necessary to use every precaution against being overheard. Three years
have come and gone since we saw these persons. On the elder time has
made little impression; but Clem has developed noticeably. The girl is
now in the very prime of her ferocious beauty. She has grown taller and
somewhat stouter; her shoulders spread like those of a caryatid; the
arm with which she props her head is as strong as a carter's and
magnificently moulded. The head itself looks immense with its pile of
glossy hair. Reddened by the rays of the fire, her features had a
splendid savagery which seemed strangely at discord with the paltry
surroundings amid which she sat; her eyes just now were gleaming with a
crafty and cruel speculation which would have become those of a
barbarian in ambush. I wonder how it came about that her strain, after
passing through the basest conditions of modern life, had thus reverted
to a type of ancestral exuberance.

'If only he doesn't hear about the old man or the girl from somebody!'
said Mrs. Peckover. 'I've been afraid of it ever since he come into the
'ouse. There's so many people might tell him. You'll have to come round
him sharp, Clem.'

The mother was dressed as her kind are wont to be on Sunday
morning--that is to say, not dressed at all, but hung about with coarse
garments, her hair in unbeautiful disarray. Clem, on the other hand,
seemed to have devoted much attention to her morning toilet; she wore a
dark dress trimmed with velveteen, and a metal ornament of primitive
taste gleamed amid her hair.

'There ain't no mistake?' she asked, after a pause. 'You're jolly sure
of that?'

'Mistake? What a blessed fool you must be! Didn't they advertise in the
papers for him? Didn't the lawyers themselves say as it was something
to his advantage? Don't you say yourself as Jane says her grandfather's
often spoke about him and wished he could find him? How can it be a
mistake? If it was only Bill's letter we had to go on, you might talk;
but--there, don't be a ijiot!'

'If it turned out as he hadn't nothing,' remarked Clem resolutely, 'I'd
leave him, if I was married fifty times.'

Her mother uttered a contemptuous sound. At the same time she moved her
head as if listening; some one was, in fact, descending the stairs.

'Here he comes,' she whispered. 'Get the eggs ready, an' I'll make the
corffee.'

A tap at the door, then entered a tallish man of perhaps forty, though
he might be a year or two younger. His face was clean-shaven,
harsh-featured, unwholesome of complexion; its chief peculiarity was
the protuberance of the bone in front of each temple, which gave him a
curiously animal aspect. His lower lip hung and jutted forward; when he
smiled, as now in advancing to the fire, it slightly overlapped the one
above. His hair was very sparse; he looked, indeed, like one who has
received the tonsure. The movement of his limbs betokened excessive
indolence; he dragged his feet rather than walked. His attire was
equally suggestive; not only had it fallen into the last degree of
shabbiness (having originally been such as is worn by a man above the
mechanic ranks), but it was patched with dirt of many kinds, and held
together by a most inadequate supply of buttons. At present he wore no
collar, and his waistcoat, half-open, exposed a red shirt.

'Why, you're all a-blowin' and a-growin' this morning, Peckover,' was
his first observation, as he dropped heavily into a wooden arm-chair.
'I shall begin to think that colour of yours ain't natural. Dare you
let me rub it with a handkerchief?'

'Course I dare,' replied Clem, tossing her head. 'Don't be so forward,
Mr. Snowdon.'

'Forward? Not I. I'm behind time if anything. I hope I haven't kept you
from church.'

He chuckled at his double joke. Mother and daughter laughed
appreciatively.

'Will you take your eggs boiled or fried?' inquired Mrs. Peckover.

'Going to give me eggs, are you? Well, I've no objection, I assure you.
And I think I'll have them fried, Mrs. Peckover. But, I say, you
mustn't be running up too big a bill. The Lord only knows when I shall
get anything to do, and it ain't very likely to be a thousand a year
when it does come.'

'Oh, that's all right,' replied the landlady, as if sordid calculation
were a thing impossible to her. 'I can't say as you behaved quite
straightforward years ago, Mr. Snowdon, but I ain't one to make a row
about bygones, an' as you say you'll put it all straight as soon as you
can, well, I won't refuse to trust you once more.'

Mr. Snowdon lay back in the chair, his hands in his waistcoat pockets,
his legs outstretched upon the fender. He was smiling placidly, now at
the preparing breakfast, now at Clem. The latter he plainly regarded
with much admiration, and cared not to conceal it. When, in a few
minutes, it was announced to him that the meal was ready, he dragged
his chair up to the table and reseated himself with a sigh of
satisfaction. A dish of excellent ham, and eggs as nearly fresh as can
be obtained in Clerkenwell, invited him with appetising odour; a large
cup of what is known to the generality of English people as coffee
steamed at his right hand; slices of new bread lay ready cut upon a
plate; a slab of the most expensive substitute for butter caught his
eye with yellow promise; vinegar and mustard appealed to the
refinements of his taste.

'I've got a couple more eggs, if you'd like them doin',' said Mrs.
Peckover, when she had watched the beginning of his attack upon the
viands.

'I think I shall manage pretty well with this supply,' returned Mr.
Snowdon.

As he ate he kept silence, partly because it was his habit, partly in
consequence of the activity of his mind. He was, in fact, musing upon a
question which he found it very difficult to answer in any satisfactory
way. 'What's the meaning of all this?' he asked himself, and not for
the first time. 'What makes them treat me in this fashion? A week ago I
came here to look up Mrs. Peckover, just because I'd run down to my
last penny, and I didn't know where to find a night's lodging. I'd got
an idea, too, that I should like to find out what had become of my
child, whom I left here nine or ten years ago; possibly she was still
alive, and might welcome the duty of supporting her parent. The chance
was, to be sure, that the girl had long since been in her grave, and
that Mrs. Peckover no longer lived in the old quarters; if I discovered
the woman, on the other hand, she was not very likely to give me an
affectionate reception, seeing that I found it inconvenient to keep
sending her money for Jane's keep in the old days. The queer thing is,
that everything turned out exactly the opposite of what I had expected.
Mrs. Peckover had rather a sour face at first, but after a little talk
she began to seem quite glad to see me. She put me into a room,
undertook to board me for a while--till I find work, and I wonder when
_that_'ll be?--and blest if this strapping daughter of hers doesn't
seem to have fallen in love with me from the first go off! As for my
girl, I'm told she was carried off by her grandfather, my old dad,
three years ago, and where they went nobody knows. Very puzzling all
this. How on earth came it that Mrs. Peckover kept the child so long,
and didn't send her to the workhouse? If I'm to believe _her_, she took
a motherly kindness for the poor brat. But that won't exactly go down
with J. J. Snowdon; he's seen a bit too much in his knocking about the
world, Still, what if I'm making a mistake about the old woman? There
_are_ some people do things of that sort; upon my soul, I've known
people be kind even to me, without a chance of being paid back! You may
think you know a man or a woman, and then all at once they'll go and do
something you'd have taken your davy couldn't possibly happen. I'd have
sworn she was nothing but a skinflint and a lying old witch. And so she
maybe; the chances are there's some game going on that I can't see
through. Make inquiries? Why, so I have done, as far as I know how.
I've only been able to hit on one person who knows anything about the
matter, and he tells me it's true enough the girl was taken away about
three years ago, but he's no idea where she went to. Surely the old man
must be dead b now, though he _was_ tough. Well, the fact of the matter
is, I've got a good berth, and I'm a precious sight too lazy to go on
the private detective job. Here's this girl Clem, the finest bit of
flesh I've seen for a long time; I've more than half a mind to see if
she won't be fool enough to marry me. I'm not a bad-looking fellow,
that's the truth, and she may have taken a real liking to me. Seems to
me that I should have come in for a Comfortable thing in my old age; if
I haven't a daughter to provide for my needs, at all events I shall
have a wife who can be persuaded into doing so. When the old woman gets
out of the way I must have a little quiet talk with Clem.'

The opportunity he desired was not long in offering itself. Having made
an excellent breakfast, he dragged his chair up to the fender again,
and reached a pipe from the mantel-piece, where he had left it last
night. Tobacco he carried loose in his waistcoat pocket; it came forth
in the form of yellowish dust, intermingled with all sorts of alien
scraps. When he had lit his pipe, he poised the chair on its hind-legs,
clasped his hands over his bald crown, and continued his musing with an
air of amiable calm. Smoke curled up from the corner of his loose lips,
and occasionally, removing his pipe for an instant, he spat skilfully
between the bars of the grate. Assured of his comfort, Mrs. Peckover
said she must go and look after certain domestic duties. Her daughter
had begun to clean some vegetables that would be cooked for dinner.

'How old may you be, Clem?' Mr. Snowdon inquired genially, when they
had been alone together for a few minutes.

'What's that to you? Guess.'

'Why, let me see; you was not much more than a baby when I went away.
You'll be eighteen or nineteen, I suppose.'

'Yes, I'm nineteen--last sixth of February. Pity you come too late to
give me a birthday present, ain't it?'

'Ah! And who'd have thought you'd have grown up such a beauty! I say,
Clem, how many of the young chaps about here have been wanting to marry
you, eh?'

'A dozen or two, I dessay,' Clem replied, shrugging her shoulders
scornfully.

Mr. Snowdon laughed, and then spat into the fire.

'Tell me about some o' them, will you? Who is it you're keeping company
with now?'

'Who, indeed? Why, there isn't one I'd look at! Several of 'em's took
to drinking 'cause I won't have nothing to do with 'em.'

This excited Mr. Snowdon's mirth in a high degree; he rolled on his
chair, and almost pitched backwards.

'I suppose you give one or other a bit of encouragement now and then,
just to make a fool of him, eh?'

'Course I do. There was Bob Hewett; he used to lodge here, but that was
after your time. I kep' him off an' on till he couldn't bear it no
longer; then he went an' married a common slut of a thing, just because
he thought it 'ud make me mad. Ha, ha! I believe he'd give her poison
an' risk it any day, if only I promised to marry him afterwards. Then
there was a feller called Jeck Bartley. I set him an' Bob fightin' one
Bank-holiday--you should a' seen 'em go at it! Jack went an' got
married a year ago to a girl called Suke Jollop; her mother forced him.
How I did laugh! Last Christmas Day they smashed up their 'ome an'
threw the bits out into the street. Jack got one of his eyes knocked
out--I thought I should a' died o' laughin' when I saw him next
mornin'.'

The hearer became uproarious in merriment.

'Tell you what it is, Clem,' he cried, 'you're something like a girl!
Darn me if I don't like you! I say, I wonder what my daughter's grown
up? Like her mother, I suppose. You an' she was sort of sisters, wasn't
you?'

He observed her closely. Clem laughed and shrugged her shoulders.

'Queer sort o' sisters. She was a bit too quiet-like for me. There
never was no fun in her.'

'Aye, like her mother. And where did you say she went to with the old
man?'

'Where she went to?' repeated Clem, regarding him steadily with her big
eyes, 'I never said nothing about it, 'cause I didn't know.'

'Well, I shan't cry about her, and I don't suppose she misses me much,
wherever she is. All the same, Clem, I'm a domesticated sort of man;
you can see that, can't you? I shouldn't wonder if I marry again one of
these first days. Just tell me where to find a girl of the right sort.
I dare say you know heaps.'

'Dessay I do. What sort do you want?'

'Oh, a littlish girl--yellow hair, you know--one of them that look as
if they didn't weigh half-a-stone.'

'I'll throw this parsnip at you, Mr. Snowdon!'

'What's up now. You don't Call yourself littlish, do you?'

Clem snapped the small end off the vegetable she was paring, and aimed
it at his head. He ducked just in time. Then there was an outburst of
laughter from both.

'Say, Clem, you haven't got a glass of beer in the house?'

'You'll have to wait till openin' time,' replied the girl sourly, going
away to the far end of the room.

'Have I offended you, Clem?'

'Offended, indeed. As if I cared what you say!'

'Do you care what I think?'

'Not I!'

'That means you do. Say, Clem, just come here; I've something to tell
you.'

'You're a nuisance. Let me get on with my work, can't you?'

'No, I can't. You just come here. You'd better not give me the trouble
of fetching you!'

The girl obeyed him. Her cheeks were very hot, and the danger-signal
was flashing in her eyes. Ten minutes later she went upstairs, and had
a vivacious dialogue of whispers with Mrs. Peckover.




CHAPTER XV

SUNLIGHT IN DREARY PLACES

Among the by-ways of Clerkenwell you might, with some difficulty, have
discovered an establishment known in its neighbourhood as
'Whitehead's.' It was an artificial-flower factory, and the rooms of
which it consisted were only to be reached by traversing a timber-yard,
and then mounting a wooden staircase outside a saw-mill. Here at busy
seasons worked some threescore women and girls, who, owing to the
nature of their occupation, were spoken of by the jocose youth of the
locality as 'Whitehead's pastepots.'

Naturally they varied much in age and aspect. There was the child who
had newly left school, and was now invited to consider the question of
how to keep herself alive; there was the woman of uncertain age, who
had spent long years of long days in the atmosphere of workrooms, and
showed the result in her parchmenty cheek and lack-lustre eye; and
between these extremes came all the various types of the London
crafts-girl: she who is young enough to hope that disappointments may
yet be made up for by the future; she who is already tasting such
scanty good as life had in store for her; she who has outlived her
illusions and no longer cares to look beyond the close of the week. If
regularly engaged as time-workers, they made themselves easy in the
prospect of wages that allowed them to sleep under a roof and eat at
certain intervals of the day; if employed on piece-work they might at
any moment find themselves wageless, but this, being a familiar state
of things, did not trouble them. With few exceptions, they were clad
neatly; on the whole, they plied their task in wonderful contentment.
The general tone of conversation among them was not high; moralists
unfamiliar with the ways of the nether world would probably have
applied a term other than negative to the laughing discussions which
now and then enlivened this or that group; but it was very seldom
indeed that a child newly arriving heard anything with which she was
not already perfectly familiar.

One afternoon at the end of May there penetrated into the largest of
the workrooms that rarest of visitants, a stray sunbeam. Only if the
sun happened to shine at given moments could any of its light fall
directly into the room I speak of; this afternoon, however, all
circumstances were favourable, and behold the floor chequered with
uncertain gleam. The workers were arranged in groups of three, called
'parties,' consisting of a learner, an improver, and a hand. All sat
with sleeves pushed up to their elbows, and had a habit of rocking to
and fro as they plied their mechanical industry. Owing to the movement
of a cloud, the sunlight spread gradually towards one of these groups;
it touched the skirt, the arms, the head of one of the girls, who, as
if gladdened by the kindly warmth, looked round and smiled. A smile you
would have been pleased to observe--unconscious, gently thoughtful,
rich in possibilities of happiness. She was quite a young girl,
certainly not seventeen, and wore a smooth grey dress, with a white
linen collar; her brown hair was closely plaited, her head well-shaped,
the bend of her neck very graceful. From her bare arms it could be seen
that she was anything but robustly made, yet her general appearance was
not one of ill-health, and she held herself, even thus late in the day,
far more uprightly than most of her companions. Had you watched her for
a while, you would have noticed that her eyes occasionally strayed
beyond the work-table, and, perhaps unconsciously, fixed themselves for
some moments on one or other of the girls near her; when she remembered
herself and looked down again upon her task, there rose to her face a
smile of the subtlest meaning, the outcome of busy reflection.

By her side was a little girl just beginning to learn the work, whose
employment it was to paper wires and make 'centres.' This toil always
results in blistered fingers, and frequent was the child's appeal to
her neighbour for sympathy.

'It'll be easier soon,' said the latter, on one of these occasions,
bending her head to speak in a low voice. 'You should have seen what
blisters I had when I began.'

'It's all very well to say that. I can't do no more, so there Oh,
when'll it be five o'clock?'

'It's a quarter to. Try and go on, Annie.'

Five o'clock did come at length, and with it twenty minutes' rest for
tea. The rule at Whitehead's was, that you could either bring your own
tea, sugar, and eatables, or purchase them here from a forewoman; most
of the workers chose to provide themselves. It was customary for each
'party' to club together, emptying their several contributions of tea
out of little twists of newspaper into one teapot. Wholesome bustle and
confusion succeeded to the former silence. One of the learners, whose
turn it was to run on errands, was overwhelmed with commissions to a
chandler's shop close by; a wry-faced, stupid little girl she was, and
they called her, because of her slowness, the 'funeral horse.' She had
strange habits, which made laughter for those who knew of them; for
instance, it was her custom in the dinner-hour to go apart and eat her
poor scraps on a doorstep close by a cook-shop; she confided to a
companion that the odour of baked joints seemed to give her food a
relish. From her present errand she returned with a strange variety of
dainties--for it was early in the week, and the girls still had coppers
in their pockets; for two or three she had purchased a farthing's-worth
of jam, which she carried in paper. A bite of this and a taste of that
rewarded her for her trouble.

The quiet-mannered girl whom we were observing took her cup of tea from
the pot in which she had a share, and from her bag produced some folded
pieces of bread and butter. She had begun her meal, when there came and
sat down by her a young woman of very different appearance--our friend,
Miss Peckover. They were old acquaintances; but when we first saw them
together it would have been difficult to imagine that they would ever
sit and converse as at present, apparently in all friendliness. Strange
to say, it was Clem who, during the past three years, had been the
active one in seeking to obliterate disagreeable memories. The younger
girl had never repelled her, but was long in overcoming the dread
excited by Clem's proximity. Even now she never looked straight into
Miss Peckover's face, as she did when speaking with others; there was
reserve in her manner, reserve unmistakable, though clothed with her
pleasant smile and amiable voice.

'I've got something to tell you, Jane,' Clem began, in a tone inaudible
to those who were sitting near. 'Something as'll surprise you.'

'What is it, I wonder?'

'You must swear you won't tell nobody.'

Jane nodded. Then the other brought her head a little nearer, and
whispered:

'I'm goin' to be married!'

'Are you really?'

'In a week. Who do you think it is? Somebody as you know of, but if you
guessed till next Christmas you'd never come right.'

Nor had Clem any intention of revealing the name, but she laughed
consumedly, as if her reticence covered the most amusing situation
conceivable.

'It'll be the biggest surprise you ever had in your life. You've swore
you won't speak about it. I don't think I shall come to work after this
week--but you'll have to come an' see us. You'll promise to, won't you?'

Still convulsed with mirth, Clem went off to another part of the room.
From Jane's countenance the look of amusement which she had perforce
summoned soon passed; it was succeeded by a shadow almost of pain, and
not till she had been at work again for nearly an hour was the former
placidity restored to her.

When final release came, Jane was among the first to hasten down the
wooden staircase and get clear of the timber yard. By the direct way,
it took her twenty minutes to walk from Whitehead's to her home in
Hanover Street, but this evening she had an object in turning aside.
The visit she wished to pay took her into a disagreeable quarter, a
street of squalid houses, swarming with yet more squalid children. On
all the doorsteps Bat little girls, themselves only just out of
infancy, nursing or neglecting bald, red-eyed, doughy-limbed abortions
in every stage of babyhood, hapless spawn of diseased humanity, born to
embitter and brutalise yet further the lot of those who unwillingly
gave them life. With wide, pitiful eyes Jane looked at each group she
passed. Three years ago she would have seen nothing but the ordinary
and the inevitable in such spectacles, but since then her moral and
intellectual being had grown on rare nourishment; there was indignation
as well as heartache in the feeling with which she had learnt to regard
the world of her familiarity. To enter the house at which she paused it
was necessary to squeeze through a conglomerate of dirty little bodies.
At the head of the first flight of stairs she came upon a girl sitting
in a weary attitude on the top step and beating the wood listlessly
with the last remnant of a hearth-brush; on her lap was one more
specimen of the infinitely-multiplied baby, and a child of two years
sprawled behind her on the landing.

'Waiting for him to come home, Pennyloaf?' said Jane.

'Oh, is that you, Miss Snowdon!' exclaimed the other, returning to
consciousness and manifesting some shame at being discovered in this
position. Hastily she drew together the front of her dress, which for
the baby's sake had been wide open, and rose to her feet. Pennyloaf was
not a bit more womanly in figure than on the day of her marriage; her
voice was still an immature treble; the same rueful irresponsibility
marked her features; but all her poor prettiness was wasted under the
disfigurement of pains and cares, Incongruously enough, she wore a gown
of bright-patterned calico, and about her neck had a collar of
pretentious lace; her hair was dressed as if for a holiday, and a daub
recently made on her cheeks by the baby's fingers lent emphasis to the
fact that she had but a little while ago washed herself with much care.

'I can't stop,' said Jane, 'but I thought I'd just look in and speak a
word. How have you been getting on?'

'Oh, do come in for just a minute!' pleaded Pennyloaf, moving backwards
to an open door, whither Jane followed. They entered a room--much like
other rooms that we have looked into from time to time. Following the
nomadic custom of their kind, Bob Hewett and his wife had lived in six
or seven different lodgings since their honeymoon in Shooter's Gardens.
Mrs. Candy first of all made a change necessary, as might have been
anticipated, and the restlessness of domestic ill-being subsequently
drove them from place to place. 'Come in 'ere, Johnny,' she Called to
the child lying on the landing. 'What's the good o' washin' you, I'd
like to know? Just see, Miss Snowdon, he's made his face all white with
the milk as the boy spilt on the stairs! Take this brush an' play with
it, do! I _can't_ keep 'em clean, Miss Snowdon, so it's no use talkin'.'

'Are you going somewhere to-night?' Jane inquired, with a glance at the
strange costume.

Pennyloaf looked up and down in a shamefaced way.

'I only did it just because I thought he might like to see me. He
promised me faithful as he'd come 'ome to-night, and I thought--it's
only somethink as got into my 'ed to-day, Miss Snowdon.'

'But hasn't he been coming home since I saw you last?'

'He did just once, an' then it was all the old ways again. I did what
you told me; I did, as sure as I'm a-standin' 'ere! I made the room so
clean you wouldn't have believed; I scrubbed the floor an' the table,
an' I washed the winders--you can see they ain't dirty yet. An' he'd
never a' paid a bit o' notice if I hadn't told him, He was jolly enough
for one night, just like he can be when he likes. But I knew as it
wouldn't last, an' the next night he was off with a lot o' fellers an'
girls, same as ever. I didn't make no row when he came 'ome; I wish I
may die if I said a word to set his back up! An' I've gone on just the
same all the week; we haven't had not the least bit of a row; so you
see I kep' my promise. But it's no good; he won't come 'ome; he's
always got fellers an' girls to go round with. He took his hoath as
he'd come back to-night, an' then it come into my 'ed as I'd put my
best things on, just to--you know what I mean, Miss Snowdon. But he
won't come before twelve o'clock; I know he won't. An' I get that low
sittin' 'ere, you can't think I can't go nowhere, because o' the
children. If it wasn't for them I could go to work again, an' I'd be
that glad; I feel as if my 'ed would drop off sometimes! I _ham_ so
glad you just come in!'

Jane had tried so many forms of encouragement, of consolation, on
previous occasions that she knew not how to repeat herself. She was
ashamed to speak words which sounded so hollow and profitless. This
silence was only too significant to Pennyloaf, and in a moment she
exclaimed with querulous energy:

'I know what'll be the bend of it! I'll go an' do like mother does--I
will! I will! I'll put my ring away, an' I'll go an' sit all night in
the public-'ouse! It's what all the others does, an' I'll do the same.
I often feel I'm a fool to go on like this. I don't know what I live
for, P'r'aps he'll be sorry when I get run in like mother.'

'Don't talk like that, Pennyloaf!' cried Jane, stamping her foot, (It
was odd how completely difference of character had reversed their
natural relations to each other; Pennyloaf was the child, Jane the
mature woman.) 'You know better, and you've no right to give way to
such thoughts. I was going to say I'd come and be with you all Saturday
afternoon, but I don't know whether I shall now. And I'd been thinking
you might like to come and see me on Sunday, but I can't have people
that go to the public-house, so we won't say anything more about it. I
shall have to be off; good-bye!'

She stepped to the door.

'Miss Snowdon!'

Jane turned, and after an instant of mock severity, broke into a laugh
which seemed to fill the wretched den with sunlight. Words, too, she
found; words of soothing influence such as leap from the heart to the
tongue in spite of the heavy thoughts that try to check them. Pennyloaf
was learning to depend upon these words for strength in her desolation.
They did not excite her to much hopefulness, but there was a sustaining
power in their sweet sincerity which made all the difference between
despair tending to evil and the sigh of renewed effort. 'I don't care,'
Pennyloaf had got into the habit of thinking, after her friend's
departure, 'I won't give up as long as she looks in now and then.'

Out from the swarm of babies Jane hurried homewards. She had a reason
for wishing to be back in good time to-night; it was Wednesday, and on
Wednesday evening there was wont to come a visitor, who sat for a
couple of hours in her grandfather's room and talked, talked--the most
interesting talk Jane had ever heard or could imagine. A latch-key
admitted her; she ran up to the second floor. A voice from the
front-room caught her ear; certainly not _his_ voice--it was too
early--but that of some unusual visitor. She was on the point of
entering her own chamber, when the other door opened, and somebody
exclaimed, 'Ah, here she is!'

The speaker was an old gentleman, dressed in black, bald, with small
and rather rugged features; his voice was pleasant. A gold chain and a
bunch of seals shone against his waistcoat, also a pair of eye-glasses.
A professional man, obviously. Jane remembered that she had seen him
once before, about a year ago, when he had talked with her for a few
minutes, very kindly.

'Will you come in here, Jane?' her grandfather's voice called to her.

Snowdon had changed much. Old age was heavy upon his shoulders, and had
even produced a slight tremulousness in his hands; his voice told the
same story of enfeeblement. Even more noticeable was the ageing of his
countenance. Something more, however, than the progress of time seemed
to be here at work. He looked strangely careworn; his forehead was set
in lines of anxiety; his mouth expressed a nervousness of which
formerly there had been no trace. One would have said that some
harassing preoccupation must have seized his mind. His eyes were no
longer merely sad and absent, but restless with fatiguing thought. As
Jane entered the room he fixed his gaze upon her--a gaze that appeared
to reveal worrying apprehension.

'You remember Mr. Percival, Jane,' he said.

The old gentleman thus presented held out his hand with something of
fatherly geniality.

'Miss Snowdon, I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you again before
long, but just now I am carrying off your grandfather for a couple of
hours, and indeed we mustn't linger that number of minutes. You look
well, I think?'

He stood and examined her intently, then cried:

'Come, my dear sir, come! we shall be late.'

Snowdon was already prepared for walking. He spoke a few words to Jane,
then followed Mr. Percival downstairs.

Flurried by the encounter, Jane stood looking about her. Then came a
rush of disappointment as she reflected that the visitor of Wednesday
evenings would call in vain. Hearing that her grandfather was absent,
doubtless he would take his leave at once. Or, would he--

In a minute or two she ran downstairs to exchange a word with Mrs.
Byass. On entering the kitchen she was surprised to see Bessie sitting
idly by the fire. At this hour it was usual for Mr. Byass to have
returned, and there was generally an uproar of laughing talk. This
evening, dead silence, and a noticeable something in the air which told
of trouble. The baby--of course a new baby--lay in a bassinette near
its mother, seemingly asleep; the other child was sitting in a high
chair by the table, clattering 'bricks.'

Bessie did not even look round.

'Is Mr. Byass late?' inquired Jane, in an apprehensive voice.

'He's somewhere in the house, I believe,' was the answer, in monotone.

'Oh dear!' Jane recognised a situation which had already come under her
notice once or twice during the last six months. She drew near, and
asked in a low voice:

'What's happened, Mrs. Byass?'

'He's a beast! If he doesn't mind I shall go and leave him. I mean it!'

Bessie was in a genuine fit of sullenness. One of her hands was
clenched below her chin; her pretty lips were not pretty at all; her
brow was rumpled. Jane began to seek for the cause of dissension, to
put affectionate questions, to use her voice soothingly.

'He's a beast!' was Bessie's reiterated observation; but by degrees she
added phrases more explanatory. 'How can I help it if he cuts himself
when he's shaving?--Serve him right!--What for? Why, for saying that
babies was nothing but a nuisance, and that _my_ baby was the ugliest
and noisiest ever born!'

'Did she cry in the night?' inquired Jane, with sympathy.

'Of course she did! Hasn't she a right to?'

'And then Mr. Byass cut himself with his razor?'

'Yes. And he said it was because he was woke so often, and it made him
nervous, and his hand shook. And then I told him he'd better cut
himself on the other side, and it wouldn't matter. And then he
complained because he had to wait for breakfast. And he said there'd
been no comfort in the house since we'd had children. And I cared
nothing about him, he said, and only about the baby and Ernest. And he
went on like a beast, as he is! I hate him!'

'Oh no, not a bit of it!' said Jane, seeing the opportunity for a
transition to jest.

'I do! And you may go upstairs and tell him so.'

'All right; I will.'

Jane ran upstairs and knocked at the door of the parlour. A gruff voice
bade her enter, but the room was nearly in darkness.

'Will you have a light, Mr. Byass?'

'No--thank you.'

'Mr. Byass, Mrs. Byass says I'm to say she hates you.'

'All right. Tell her I've known it a long time. She needn't trouble
about me; I'm going out to enjoy myself.'

Jane ran back to the kitchen.

'Mr. Byass says he's known it a long time,' she reported, with much
gravity. 'And he's going out to enjoy himself.'

Bessie remained mute.

'What message shall I take back, Mrs. Byass?'

'Tell him if he dares to leave the house, I'll go to mother's the first
thing to-morrow, and let them know how he's treating me.'

'Tell her,' was Mr. Byass's reply, 'that I don't see what it matters to
her whether I'm at home or away. And tell her she's a cruel wife to me.'

Something like the sound of a snivel came out of the darkness as he
concluded. Jane, in reporting his speech, added that she thought he was
shedding tears. Thereupon Bessie gave a sob, quite in earnest.

'So am I,' she said chokingly. 'Go and tell him, Jane.'

'Mr. Byass, Mrs. Byass is crying,' whispered Jane at the parlour-door.
'Don't you think you'd better, go downstairs?'

Hearing a movement, she ran to be out of the way. Samuel left the dark
room, and with slow step descended to the kitchen. Then Jane knew that
it was all right, and tripped up to her room humming a song of
contentment.

Had she, then, wholly outgrown the bitter experiences of her childhood?
Had the cruelty which tortured her during the years when the soul is
being fashioned left upon her no brand of slavish vice, nor the
baseness of those early associations affected her with any irremovable
taint? As far as human observation could probe her, Jane Snowdon had no
spot of uncleanness in her being; she had been rescued while it was yet
time, and the subsequent period of fostering had enabled features of
her character, which no one could have discerned in the helpless child,
to expand with singular richness. Two effects of the time of her
bondage were, however, clearly to be distinguished. Though nature had
endowed her with a good intelligence, she could only with extreme
labour acquire that elementary book-knowledge which vulgar children get
easily enough; it seemed as if the bodily overstrain at a critical
period of life had affected her memory, and her power of mental
application generally. In spite of ceaseless endeavour, she could not
yet spell words of the least difficulty; she could not do the easiest
sums with accuracy; geographical names were her despair. The second
point in which she had suffered harm was of more serious nature. She
was subject to fits of hysteria, preceded and followed by the most
painful collapse of that buoyant courage which was her supreme charm
and the source of her influence. Without warning, an inexplicable
terror would fall upon her; like the weakest child, she craved
protection from a dread inspired solely by her imagination, and solace
for an anguish of wretchedness to which she could give no form in
words. Happily this illness afflicted her only at long intervals, and
her steadily improving health gave warrant for hoping that in time it
would altogether pass away.

Whenever an opportunity had offered for struggling successfully with
some form of evil--were it poor Pennyloaf's dangerous despair, or the
very human difficulties between Bessie and her husband--Jane lived at
her highest reach of spiritual joy. For all that there was a
disappointment on her mind, she felt this joy to-night, and went about
her pursuits in happy self-absorption. So it befell that she did not
hear a knock at the house-door. Mrs. Byass answered it, and not knowing
that Mr. Snowdon was from home, bade his usual visitor go upstairs. The
visitor did so, and announced his presence at the door of the room.

'Oh, Mr. Kirkwood,' said Jane, 'I'm so sorry, but grandfather had to go
out with a gentleman.'

And she waited, looking at him, a gentle warmth on her face.




CHAPTER XVI

DIALOGUE AND COMMENT

'Will it be late before he comes back?' asked Sidney, his smile of
greeting shadowed with disappointment.

'Not later than half-past ten, he said.'

Sidney turned his face to the stairs. The homeward prospect was dreary
after that glimpse of the familiar mom through the doorway. The breach
of habit discomposed him, and something more positive strengthened his
reluctance to be gone. It was not his custom to hang in hesitancy and
court chance by indirectness of speech; recognising and admitting his
motives, he said simply:

'I should like to stay a little, if you will let me--if I shan't be in
your way?'

'Oh no! Please come in. I'm only sewing.'

There were two round-backed wooden chairs in the room; one stood on
each side of the fireplace, and between them, beside the table, Jane
always had her place on a small chair of the ordinary comfortless kind.
She seated herself as usual, and Sidney took his familiar position,
with the vacant chair opposite. Snowdon and he were accustomed to smoke
their pipes whilst conversing, but this evening Sidney dispensed with
tobacco.

It was very quiet here. On the floor below dwelt at present two sisters
who kept themselves alive (it is quite inaccurate to use any other
phrase in such instances) by doing all manner of skilful needlework;
they were middle-aged women, gentle-natured, and so thoroughly subdued
to the hopelessness of their lot that scarcely ever could even their
footfall be heard as they went up and down stairs; their voices were
always sunk to a soft murmur. Just now no infant wailing came from the
Byasses' regions. Kirkwood enjoyed a sense of restfulness, intenser,
perhaps, for the momentary disappointment he had encountered. He had no
desire to talk; enough for a few minutes to sit and watch Jane's hand
as it moved backwards and forwards with the needle.

'I went to see Pennyloaf as I came back from work,' Jane said at
length, just looking up.

'Did you? Do things seem to be any better?'

'Not much, I'm afraid. Mr. Kirkwood, don't you think you might do
something? If you tried again with her husband?'

'The fact is,' replied Sidney, 'I'm so afraid of doing more harm than
good.'

'You think--But then perhaps that's just what _I'm_ doing?'

Jane let her hand fall on the sewing and regarded him anxiously.

'No, no! I'm quite sure _you_ can't do harm. Pennyloaf can get nothing
but good from having you as a friend. She likes you; she misses you
when you happen not to have seen her for a few days. I'm sorry to say
it's quite a different thing with Bob and me. We're friendly enough--as
friendly as ever--but I haven't a scrap of influence with him like you
have with his wife. It was all very well to get hold of him once, and
try to make him understand, in a half-joking way, that he wasn't
behaving as well as he might. He didn't take it amiss--just that once.
But you can't think how difficult it is for one man to begin preaching
to another. The natural thought is: Mind your own business. If I was
the parson of the parish--'

He paused, and in the same instant their eyes met. The suggestion was
irresistible; Jane began to laugh merrily.

What sweet laughter it was? How unlike the shrill discord whereby the
ordinary workgirl expresses her foolish mirth! For years Sidney
