Kirkwood had been unused to utter any sound of merriment; even his
smiling was done sadly. But of late he had grown conscious of the
element of joy in Jane's character, had accustomed himself to look for
its manifestations--to observe the brightening of her eyes which
foretold a smile, the moving of her lips which suggested inward
laughter--and he knew that herein, as in many another matter, a
profound sympathy was transforming him. Sorrow such as he had suffered
will leave its mark upon the countenance long after time has done its
kindly healing, and in Sidney's case there was more than the mere
personal affliction tending to confirm his life in sadness. With the
ripening of his intellect, he saw only more and more reason to condemn
and execrate those social disorders of which his own wretched
experience was but an illustration. From the first, his friendship with
Snowdon had exercised upon him a subduing influence; the old man was
stern enough in his criticism of society, but he did not belong to the
same school as John Hewett, and the sober authority of his character
made appeal to much in Sidney that had found no satisfaction amid the
uproar of Clerkenwell Green. For all that, Kirkwood could not become
other than himself; his vehemence was moderated, but he never affected
to be at one with Snowdon in that grave enthusiasm of far-off hope
which at times made the old man's speech that of an exhorting prophet.
Their natural parts were reversed; the young eyes declared that they
could see nothing but an horizon of blackest cloud, whilst those
enfeebled by years bore ceaseless witness to the raying forth of dawn.

And so it was with a sensation of surprise that Sidney first became
aware of light-heartedness in the young girl who was a silent hearer of
so many lugubrious discussions. Ridiculous as it may sound--as Sidney
felt it to be--he almost resented this evidence of happiness; to him,
only just recovering from a shock which would leave its mark upon his
life to the end, his youth wronged by bitter necessities, forced into
brooding over problems of ill when nature would have bidden him enjoy,
it seemed for the moment a sign of shallowness that Jane could look and
speak cheerfully. This extreme of morbid feeling proved its own cure;
even in reflecting upon it, Sidney was constrained to laugh
contemptuously at himself. And therewith opened for him a new world of
thought. He began to study the girl. Of course he had already occupied
himself much with the peculiarities of her position, but of Jane
herself he knew very little; she was still, in his imagination, the
fearful and miserable child over whose shoulders he had thrown his coat
one bitter night; his impulse towards her was one of compassion merely,
justified now by what he heard of her mental slowness, her bodily
sufferings. It would take very long to analyse the process whereby this
mode of feeling was changed, until it became the sense of
ever-deepening sympathy which so possessed him this evening. Little by
little Jane's happiness justified itself to him, and in so doing began
subtly to modify his own temper. With wonder he recognised that the
poor little serf of former days had been meant by nature for one of the
most joyous among children. What must that heart have suffered, so
scorned and trampled upon! But now that the days of misery were over,
behold nature having its way after all. If the thousands are never
rescued from oppression, if they perish abortive in their wretchedness,
is that a reason for refusing to rejoice with the one whom fate has
blest? Sidney knew too much of Jane by this time to judge her
shallow-hearted. This instinct of gladness had a very different
significance from the animal vitality which prompted the constant
laughter of Bessie Byass; it was but one manifestation of a moral force
which made itself nobly felt in many another way. In himself Sidney was
experiencing its pure effects, and it was owing to his conviction of
Jane's power for good that he had made her acquainted with Bob Hewett's
wife. Snowdon warmly approved of this; the suggestion led him to speak
expressly of Jane, a thing he very seldom did, and to utter a strong
wish that she should begin to concern herself with the sorrows she
might in some measure relieve.

Sidney joined in the laughter he had excited by picturing himself the
parson of the parish. But the topic under discussion was a serious one,
and Jane speedily recovered her gravity.

'Yes, I see how hard it is,' she said. 'But it's a cruel thing for him
to neglect poor Pennyloaf as he does. She never gave him any cause.'

'Not knowingly, I quite believe,' replied Kirkwood. 'But what a
miserable home it is!'

'Yes.' Jane shook her head. 'She doesn't seem to know how to keep
things in order. She doesn't seem even to understand me when I try to
show her how it might be different.'

'There's the root of the trouble, Jane. What chance had Pennyloaf of
ever learning how to keep a decent home, and bring up her children
properly? How was _she_ brought up? The wonder is that there's so much
downright good in her; I feel the same wonder about people every day.
Suppose Pennyloaf behaved as badly as her mother does, who on earth
would have the right to blame her? But we can't expect miracles; so
long as she lives decently, it's the most that can be looked for. And
there you are; that isn't enough to keep a fellow like Bob Hewett in
order. I doubt whether any wife would manage it, but as for poor
Pennyloaf--'

'I shall speak to him myself,' said Jane quietly.

'Do! There's much more hope in that than in anything I could say. Bob
isn't a bad fellow; the worst thing I know of him is his conceit. He's
good-looking, and he's clever in all sorts of ways, and unfortunately
he can't think of anything but his own merits. Of course he'd no
business to marry at all whilst he was nothing but a boy.'

Jane plied her needle, musing.

'Do you know whether he ever goes to see his father?' Sidney inquired
presently.

'No, I don't,' Jane answered, looking at him, but immediately dropping
her eyes.

'If he doesn't I should think worse of him. Nobody ever had a kinder
father, and there's many a reason why he should be careful to pay the
debt he owes.'

Jane waited a moment, then again raised her eyes to him. It seemed as
though she would ask a question, and Sidney's grave attentiveness
indicated a surmise of what she was about to say. But her thought
remained unuttered, and there was a prolongation of silence.

Of course they were both thinking of Clara. That name had never been
spoken by either of them in the other's presence, but as often as
conversation turned upon the Hewetts, it was impossible for them not to
supplement their spoken words by a silent colloquy of which Clara was
the subject. From her grandfather Jane knew that, to this day, nothing
had been heard of Hewett's daughter; what people said at the time of
the girl's disappearance she had learned fully enough from Clem
Peckover, who even yet found it pleasant to revive the scandal, and by
contemptuous comments revenge herself for Clara's haughty usage in old
days. Time had not impaired Jane's vivid recollection of that
Bank-holiday morning when she herself was the first to make it known
that Clara had gone away. Many a time since then she had visited the
street whither Snowdon led her--had turned aside from her wonted paths
in the thought that it was not impossible she might meet Clara, though
whether with more hope or fear of such a meeting she could not have
said. When two years had gone by, her grandfather one day led the talk
to that subject; he was then beginning to change in certain respects
the tone he had hitherto used with her, and to address her as one who
had outgrown childhood. He explained to her how it came about that
Sidney could no longer be even on terms of acquaintance with John
Hewett. The conversation originated in Jane's bringing the news that
Hewett and his family had at length left Mrs. Peckover's house. For two
years things had gone miserably with them, their only piece of good
fortune being the death of the youngest child. John was confirmed in a
habit of drinking. Not that he had become a brutal sot; sometimes for
as much as a month he would keep sober, and even when he gave way to
temptation he never behaved with violence to his wife and children.
Still, the character of his life had once more suffered a degradation,
and he possessed no friends who could be of the least use to him.
Snowdon, for some reason of his own, maintained a slight intercourse
with the Peckovers, and through them he endeavoured to establish an
intimacy with Hewett; but the project utterly failed. Probably on
Kirkwood's account, John met the old man's advances with something more
than coldness. Sternly he had forbidden his wife and the little ones to
exchange a word of any kind with Sidney, or with any friend of his. He
appeared to nourish incessantly the bitter resentment to which he gave
expression when Sidney and he last met.

There was no topic on which Sidney was more desirous of speaking with
Jane than this which now occupied both their minds. How far she
understood Clara's story, and his part in it, he had no knowledge; for
between Snowdon and himself there had long been absolute silence on
that matter. It was not improbable that Jane had been instructed in the
truth; he hoped she had not been left to gather what she could from
Clem Peckover's gossip. Yet the difficulty with which he found himself
beset, now that an obvious opportunity offered for frank speech, was so
great that, after a few struggles, he fell back on the reflection with
which he was wont to soothe himself: Jane was still so young, and the
progress of time, by confirming her knowledge of him, would make it all
the simpler to explain the miserable past. Had he, in fact, any right
to relate this story, to seek her sympathy in that direct way? It was
one aspect of a very grave question which occupied more and more of
Sidney's thought.

With an effort, he turned the dialogue into quite a new direction, and
Jane, though a little absent for some minutes, seemed at length to
forget the abruptness of the change. Sidney had of late been resuming
his old interest in pencil-work; two or three of his drawings hung on
these walls, and he spoke of making new sketches when he next went into
the country. Years ago, one of his favourite excursions--of the longer
ones which he now and then allowed himself--was to Danbury Hill, some
five miles to the east of Chelmsford, one of the few pieces of rising
ground in Essex, famous for its view over Maldon and the estuary of the
Blackwater. Thither Snowdon and Jane accompanied him during the last
summer but one, and the former found so much pleasure in the place that
he took lodgings with certain old friends of Sidney's, and gave his
granddaughter a week of healthful holiday. In the summer that followed,
the lodgings were again taken for a week, and this year the same
expedition was in view. Sidney had as good as promised that he would
join his friends for the whole time of their absence, and now he talked
with Jane of memories and anticipations. Neither was sensible how the
quarters and the half-hours went by in such chatting. Sidney abandoned
himself to the enjoyment of peace such as he had never known save in
this room, to a delicious restfulness such as was always inspired in
him by the girl's gentle voice, by her laughter, by her occasional
quiet movements. The same influence was affecting his whole life. To
Jane he owed the gradual transition from tumultuous politics and social
bitterness to the mood which could find pleasure as of old in nature
and art. This was his truer self, emancipated from the distorting
effect of the evil amid which he perforce lived. He was recovering
somewhat of his spontaneous boyhood; at the same time, reaching after a
new ideal of existence which only ripened manhood could appreciate.

Snowdon returned at eleven; it alarmed Sidney to find how late he had
allowed himself to remain, and he began shaping apologies. But the old
man had nothing but the familiar smile and friendly words.

'Haven't you given Mr. Kirkwood any supper?' he asked of Jane, looking
at the table.

'I really forgot all about it, grandfather,' was the laughing reply.

Then Snowdon laughed, and Sidney joined in the merriment; but he would
not be persuaded to stay longer.




CHAPTER XVII

CLEM MAKES A DISCLOSURE

When Miss Peckover suggested to her affianced that their wedding might
as well take place at the registry-office, seeing that there would then
be no need to go to expense in the article of costume, Mr. Snowdon
readily assented; at the same time it gave him new matter for
speculation. Clem was not exactly the kind of girl to relinquish
without good reason that public ceremony which is the dearest of all
possible ceremonies to women least capable of reverencing its
significance. Every day made it more obvious that the Peckovers desired
to keep this marriage a secret until it was accomplished. In one way
only could Joseph James account for the mystery running through the
whole affair; it must be that Miss Peckover had indiscretions to
conceal, certain points in her history with which she feared lest her
bridegroom should be made acquainted by envious neighbours. The thought
had no effect upon Mr. Snowdon save to excite his mirth; his attitude
with regard to such possibilities was that of a philosopher. The views
with which he was entering upon this alliance were so beautifully
simple that he really did not find it worth while to puzzle further as
soon as the plausible solution of his difficulties had presented
itself. Should he hereafter discover that something unforeseen
perturbed the smooth flow of life to which he looked forward, nothing
could be easier than his remedy; the world is wide, and a cosmopolitan
does not attach undue importance to a marriage contracted in one of its
somewhat numerous parishes. In any case he would have found the
temporary harbour of refuge which stress of weather had made necessary.
He surrendered himself to the pleasant tickling of his vanity which was
an immediate result of the adventure. For, whatever Clem might be
hiding, it seemed to him beyond doubt that she was genuinely attracted
by his personal qualities. Her demonstrations were not extravagant, but
in one noteworthy respect she seemed to give evidence of a sensibility
so little in keeping with her general character that it was only to be
explained as the result of a strong passion. In conversing with him she
at times displayed a singular timidity, a nervousness, a self-subdual
surprisingly unlike anything that could be expected from her. It was
true that at other moments her lover caught a gleam in her eyes, a
movement of her lips, expressive of anything rather than diffidence,
and tending to confirm his view of her as a cunning as well as fierce
animal, but the look and tone of subjugation came often enough to make
their impression predominant. One would have said that she suffered
from jealous fears which for some reason she did not venture to utter.
Now and then he surprised her gazing at him as if in troubled
apprehension, the effect of which upon Mr. Snowdon was perhaps more
flattering than any other look.

'What's up, Clem?' he inquired, on one of these occasions. 'Are you
wondering whether I shall cut and leave you when we've had time to get
tired of each other?'

Her face was transformed; she looked at him for an instant with fierce
suspicion, then laughed disagreeably.

'We'll see about that,' was her answer, with a movement of the head and
shoulders strongly reminding one of a lithe beast about to spring.

The necessary delay passed without accident. As the morning of the
marriage approached there was, however, a perceptible increase of
nervous restlessness in Clem. She had given up her work at Whitehead's,
and contrived to keep her future husband within sight nearly all day
long. Joseph James found nothing particularly irksome in this, for beer
and tobacco were supplied him _ad libitum_, and a succession of
appetising meals made the underground kitchen a place of the
pleasantest associations. A loan from Mrs. Peckover had enabled him to
renew his wardrobe. When the last night arrived, Clem and her mother
sat conversing to a late hour, their voices again cautiously subdued. A
point had been for some days at issue between them, and decision was
now imperative.

'It's you as started the job,' Clem observed with emphasis, 'an' it's
you as'll have to finish it.'

'And who gets most out of it, I'd like to know?' replied her mother.
'Don't be such a fool! Can't you see as it'll come easier from you? A
nice thing for his mother-in-law to tell him! If you don't like to do
it the first day, then leave it to the second, or third. But if you
take my advice, you'll get it over the next morning.'

'You'll have to do it yourself,' Clem repeated stubbornly, propping her
chin upon her fists.

'Well, I never thought as you was such a frightened babby! Frightened
of a feller like him! I'd be ashamed o' myself!'

'Who's frightened? Hold your row!'

'Why, you are; what else?'

'I ain't!'

'You are!'

'I ain't! You'd better not make me mad, or I'll tell him before, just
to spite you.'

'Spite _me_, you cat! What difference 'll it make to me? I'll tell you
what: I've a jolly good mind to tell him myself beforehand, and then
we'll see who's spited.'

In the end Clem yielded, shrugging her shoulders defiantly.

'I'll have a kitchen-knife near by when I tell him,' she remarked with
decision. 'If he lays a hand on me I'll cut his face open, an' chance
it!'

Mrs. Peckover smiled with tender motherly deprecation of such extreme
measures. But Clem repeated her threat, and there was something in her
eyes which guaranteed the possibility of its fulfilment.

No personal acquaintance of either the Peckover or the Snowdon family
happened to glance over the list of names which hung in the registrar's
office during these weeks. The only interested person who had
foreknowledge of Clem's wedding was Jane Snowdon, and Jane, though
often puzzled in thinking of the matter, kept her promise to speak of
it to no one. It was imprudence in Clem to have run this risk, but the
joke was so rich that she could not deny herself its enjoyment; she
knew, moreover, that Jane was one of those imbecile persons who scruple
about breaking a pledge. On the eve of her wedding-day she met Jane as
the latter came from Whitehead's, and requested her to call in the
Close next Sunday morning at twelve o'clock.

'I want you to see my 'usband,' she said, grinning. 'I'm sure you'll
like him.'

Jane promised to come. On the next day, Saturday, Clem entered the
registry-office in a plain dress, and after a few simple formalities
came forth as Mrs. Snowdon; her usual high colour was a trifle
diminished, and she kept glancing at her husband from under nervously
knitted brows. Still the great event was unknown to the inhabitants of
the Close. There was no feasting, and no wedding-journey; for the
present Mr. and Mrs. Snowdon would take possession of two rooms on the
first floor.

Twenty-four hours later, when the bells of St. James's were ringing
their melodies before service, Clem requested her husband's attention
to something of importance she had to tell him.

Mr. Snowdon had just finished breakfast and was on the point of
lighting his pipe; with the match burning down to his fingers, he
turned and regarded the speaker shrewdly. Clem's face put it beyond
question that at last she was about to make a statement definitely
bearing on the history of the past month. At this moment she was almost
pale, and her eyes avoided his. She stood close to the table, and her
right hand rested near the bread-knife; her left held a piece of paper.

'What is it?' asked Joseph James mildly. 'Go ahead, Clem.'

'You ain't bad-tempered, are you? You said you wasn't.'

'Not I! Best-tempered feller you could have come across. Look at me
smiling.'

His grin was in a measure reassuring, but he had caught sight of the
piece of paper in her hand, and eyed it steadily.

'You know you played mother a trick a long time ago,' Clem pursued,
'when you went off an' left that child on her 'ands.'

'Hollo! What about that?'

'Well, it wouldn't be nothing but fair if someone was to go and play
tricks with _you_--just to pay you off in a friendly sort o' way--see?'

Mr. Snowdon still smiled, but dubiously.

'Out with it!' he muttered. 'I'd have bet a trifle there was some game
on. You're welcome, old girl. Out with it!'

'Did you know as I'd got a brother in 'Stralia--him as you used to know
when you lived here before?'

'You said you didn't know where he was.'

'No more we do--not just now. But he wrote mother a letter about this
time last year, an' there's something in it as I'd like you to see.
You'd better read for yourself.'

Her husband laid down his pipe on the mantel-piece and began to cast
his eye over the letter, which was much defaced by frequent foldings,
and in any case would have been difficult to decipher, so vilely was it
scrawled. But Mr. Snowdon's interest was strongly excited, and in a few
moments he had made out the following communication:

'I don't begin with no deering, because it's a plaid out thing, and
because I'm riting to too people at onse, both mother and Clem, and
it's so long since I've had a pen in my hand I've harf forgot how to
use it. If you think I'm making my pile, you think rong, so you've got
no need to ask me when I'm going to send money home, like you did in
the last letter. I jest keep myself and that's about all, because
things ain't what they used to be in this busted up country. And that
remminds me what it was as I ment to tell you when I cold get a bit of
time to rite. Not so long ago, I met a chap as used to work for
somebody called Snowdon, and from what I can make out it was Snowdon's
brother at home, him as we use to ere so much about. He'd made his
pile, this Snowdon, you bet, and Ned Williams says he died worth no end
of thousands. Not so long before he died, his old farther from England
came out to live with him; then Snowdon and a son as he had both got
drownded going over a river at night. And Ned says as all the money
went to the old bloak and to a brother in England, and that's what he
herd when he was paid off. The old farther made traks very soon, and
they sed he'd gone back to England. So it seams to me as you ouht to
find Snowdon and make him pay up what he ose you. And I don't know as
I've anything more to tell you both, ecsep I'm working at a place as I
don't know how to spell, and it woldn't be no good if I did, because
there's no saying were I shall be before you could rite back. So good
luck to you both, from yours truly, W. P.'

In reading, Joseph James scratched his bald head thoughtfully. Before
he had reached the end there were signs of emotion in his projecting
lower lip. At length he regarded Clem, no longer smiling, but without
any of the wrath she had anticipated.

'Ha, ha! This was your game, was it? Well, I don't object, old girl--so
long as you tell me a bit more about it. Now there's no need for any
more lies, perhaps you'll mention where the old fellow is.'

'He's livin' not so far away, an' Jane with him.'

Put somewhat at her ease, Clem drew her hand from the neighbourhood of
the bread-knife, and detailed all she knew with regard to old Mr.
Snowdon and his affairs. Her mother had from the first suspected that
he possessed money, seeing that he paid, with very little demur, the
sum she demanded for Jane's board and lodging. True, he went to live in
poor lodgings, but that was doubtless a personal eccentricity. An
important piece of evidence subsequently forthcoming was the fact that
in sundry newspapers there appeared advertisements addressed to Joseph
James Snowdon, requesting him to communicate with Messrs. Percival &
Peel of Furnival's Inn, whereupon Mrs. Peckover made inquiries of the
legal firm in question (by means of an anonymous letter), and received
a simple assurance that Mr. Snowdon was being sought for his own
advantage.

'You're cool hands, you and your mother,' observed Joseph James, with a
certain involuntary admiration. 'This was not quite three years ago,
you say; just when I was in America. Ha--hum! What I can't make out is,
how the devil that brother of mine came to leave anything to me. We
never did anything but curse each other from the time we were children
to when we parted for good. And so the old man went out to Australia,
did he? That's a rum affair, too; Mike and he could never get on
together. Well, I suppose there's no mistake about it. I shouldn't much
mind if there was, just to see the face _you'd_ pull, young woman. On
the whole, perhaps it's as well for you that I _am_ fairly
good-tempered--eh?'

Clem stood apart, smiling dubiously, now and then eyeing him askance.
His last words once more put her on her guard; she moved towards the
table again.

'Give me the address,' said her husband. 'I'll go and have a talk with
my relations. What sort of a girl's Janey grown up--eh?'

'If you'll wait a bit, you can see for yourself. She's goin' to call
here at twelve.'

'Oh, she is? I suppose you've arranged a pleasant little surprise for
her? Well, I must say you're a cool band, Clem. I shouldn't wonder if
she's been in the house several times since I've been here?'

'No, she hasn't. It wouldn't have been safe, you see.'

'Give me the corkscrew, and I'll open this bottle of whisky. It takes
it out of a fellow, this kind of thing. Here's to you, Mrs. Clem! Have
a drink? All right; go downstairs and show your mother you're alive
still; and let me know when Jane comes. I want to think a bit.'

When he had sat for a quarter of an hour in solitary reflection the
door opened, and Clem led into the room a young girl, whose face
expressed timid curiosity. Joseph James stood up, joined his hands
under his coat-tail, and examined the stranger.

'Do you know who it is?' asked Clem of her companion.

'Your husband--but I don't know his name.'

'You ought to, it seems to me,' said Clem, giggling. 'Look at him.'

Jane tried to regard the man for a moment. Her cheeks flushed with
confusion. Again she looked at him, and the colour rapidly faded. In
her eyes was a strange light of painfully struggling recollection. She
turned to Clem, and read her countenance with distress.

'Well, I'm quite sure I should never have known _you_, Janey,' said
Snowdon, advancing. 'Don't you remember your father?'

Yes; as soon as consciousness could reconcile what seemed
impossibilities Jane had remembered him. She was not seven years old
when he forsook her, and a life of anything but orderly progress had
told upon his features. Nevertheless Jane recognised the face she had
never had cause to love, recognised yet more certainly the voice which
carried her back to childhood. But what did it all mean? The shock was
making her heart throb as it was wont to do before her fits of illness.
She looked about her with dazed eyes.

'Sit down, sit down,' said her father, not without a note of genuine
feeling. 'It's been a bit too much for you--like something else was for
me just now. Put some water in that glass, Clem; a drop of this will do
her good.'

The smell of what was offered her proved sufficient to restore Jane;
she shook her head and put the glass away. After an uncomfortable
silence, during which Joseph dragged his feet about the floor, Clem
remarked:

'He wants you to take him home to see your grandfather, Jane. There's
been reasons why he couldn't go before. Hadn't you better go at once,
Jo?'

Jane rose and waited whilst her father assumed his hat and drew on a
new pair of gloves. She could not look at either husband or wife.
Presently she found herself in the street, walking without
consciousness of things in the homeward direction.

'You've grown up a very nice, modest girl, Jane,' was her father's
first observation. 'I can see your grandfather has taken good care of
you.'

He tried to speak as if the situation were perfectly simple. Jane could
find no reply.

'I thought it was better,' he continued, in the same matter-of-fact
voice, 'not to see either of you till this marriage of mine was over.
I've had a great deal of trouble in life--I'll tell you all about it
some day, my dear--and I wanted just to settle myself before--I dare
say you'll understand what I mean. I suppose your grandfather has often
spoken to you about me?'

'Not very often, father,' was the murmured answer.

'Well, well; things'll soon be set right. I feel quite proud of you,
Janey; I do, indeed. And I suppose you just keep house for him, eh?'

'I go to work as well.'

'What? You go to work? How's that, I wonder?'

'Didn't Miss Peckover tell you?'

Joseph laughed. The girl could not grasp all these astonishing facts at
once, and the presence of her father made her forget who Miss Peckover
had become.

'You mean my wife, Janey! No, no; she didn't tell me you went to
work;--an accident. But I'm delighted you and Clem are such good
friends. Kind-hearted girl, isn't she?'

Jane whispered an assent.

'No doubt your grandfather often tells you about Australia, and your
uncle that died there?'

'No, he never speaks of Australia. And I never heard of my uncle.'

'Indeed? Ha--hum!'

Joseph continued his examination all the way to Hanover Street, often
expressing surprise, but never varying from the tone of affection and
geniality. When they reached the door of the house he said:

'Just let me go into the room by myself. I think it'll be better. He's
alone, isn't he?'

'Yes. I'll come up and show you the door.'

She did so, then turned aside into her own room, where she sat
motionless for a long time.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE JOKE IS COMPLETED

Michael Snowdon--to distinguish the old man by name from the son who
thus unexpectedly returned to him--professed no formal religion. He
attended no Sunday service, nor had ever shown a wish that Jane should
do so. We have seen that he used the Bible as a source of moral
instruction; Jane and he still read passages together on a Sunday
morning, but only such were chosen as had a purely human significance,
and the comments to which they gave occasion never had any but a human
bearing. Doubtless Jane reflected on these things; it was her
grandfather's purpose to lead her to such reflection, without himself
dogmatising on questions which from his own point of view were
unimportant. That Jane should possess the religious spirit was a desire
he never lost sight of; the single purpose of his life was involved
therein; but formalism was against the bent of his nature. Born and
bred amid the indifference of the London working classes, he was one of
the very numerous thinking men who have never needed to cast aside a
faith of childhood; from the dawn of rationality, they simply stand
apart from all religious dogmas, unable to understand the desire of
such helps to conduct, untouched by spiritual trouble--as that phrase
is commonly interpreted. And it seemed that Jane closely resembled him
in this matter. Sensitive to every prompting of humanity, instinct with
moral earnestness, she betrayed no slightest tendency to the religion
of church, chapel, or street-corner. A promenade of the Salvation Army
half-puzzled, half-amused her; she spoke of it altogether without
intolerance, as did her grandfather, but never dreamt that it was a
phenomenon which could gravely concern her. Prayers she had never said;
enough that her last thought before sleeping was one of kindness to
those beings amid whom she lived her life, that on awaking her mind
turned most naturally to projects of duty and helpfulness.

Excepting the Bible, Snowdon seldom made use of books either for
inquiry or amusement. Very imperfectly educated in his youth, he had
never found leisure for enriching his mind in the ordinary way until it
was too late; as an old man he had so much occupation in his thoughts
that the printed page made little appeal to him. Till quite recently he
had been in the habit of walking for several hours daily, always
choosing poor districts; now that his bodily powers were sensibly
failing him, he passed more and more of his time in profound brooding,
so forgetful of external things that Jane, on her return from work, had
more than once been troubled by noticing that he had taken no midday
meal. It was in unconsciousness such as this that he sat when his son
Joseph, receiving no reply to his knock, opened the door and entered;
but that his eyes were open, the posture of his body and the forward
drooping of his head would have made it appear that he slept. Joseph
stepped towards him, and at length the old man looked up. He gazed at
his visitor first unintelligently, then with wonder and growing emotion.

'Jo?--Jo, at last? You were in my mind only a few minutes ago, but I
saw you as a boy.'

He rose from the chair and held out both his hands, trembling more than
they were wont to do.

'I almost wonder you knew me,' said Joseph. 'It's seventeen years since
we saw each other. It was all Jane could do to remember me.'

'Jane? Where have you seen her? At the house in the Close?'

'Yes. It was me she went to see, but she didn't know it. I've just been
married to Miss Peckover. Sit down again, father, and let's talk over
things quietly.'

'Married to Miss Peckover?' repeated the old man, as if making an
effort to understand the words. 'Then why didn't you come here before?'

Joseph gave the explanation which he had already devised for the
benefit of his daughter. His manner of speaking was meant to be very
respectful, but it suggested that he looked upon the hearer as
suffering from feebleness of mind, as well as of body. He supplemented
his sentences with gestures and smiles, glancing about the room
meantime with looks of much curiosity.

'So you've been living here a long time, father? It was uncommonly good
of you to take care of my girl. I dare say you've got so used to having
her by you, you wouldn't care for her to go away now?'

'Do you wish to take Jane away?' Michael inquired gravely.

'No, no; not I! Why, it's nothing but her duty to keep you company and
be what use she can. She's happy enough, that I can see. Well, well;
I've gone through a good deal since the old days, father, and I'm not
what you used to know me. I'm gladder than I can say to find you so
easy in your old age. Neither Mike nor me did our duty by you, that's
only too sure. I wish I could have the time back again; but what's the
good of that? Can you tell me anything about Mike?'

'Yes. He died in Australia, about four years ago.'

'Did he now? Well, I've been in America, but I never got so far as
Australia. So Mike's dead, is he? I hope he had better luck than me.'

The old man did not cease from examining his son's countenance.

'What is your position, at present?' he asked, after a pause. 'You
don't look unprosperous.'

'Nothing to boast of, father. I've gone through all kinds of trades. In
the States I both made and lost money. I invented a new method of
nickel-plating, but it did me no good, and then I gave up that line
altogether. Since I've been back in England--two years about--I've
mostly gone in for canvassing, advertising agencies, and that kind of
thing. I make an honest living, and that's about all. But I shouldn't
wonder if things go a bit better now; I feel as if I was settled at
last. What with having a home of my own, and you and Janey near at
hand--You won't mind if I come and see you both now and then?'

'I shall hope to see you often,' replied the other, still keeping his
grave face and tone. 'It's been my strong desire that we might come
together again, and I've done the best I could to find you. But, as you
said, we've been parted for a very long time, and it isn't in a day
that we can come to understand each other. These seventeen years have
made an old man of me, Jo; I think and speak and act slowly:--better
for us all if I had learned to do so long ago! Your coming was
unexpected; I shall need a little time to get used to the change it
makes.'

'To be sure; that's true enough. Plenty of time to talk over things. As
far as I'm concerned, father, the less said about bygones the better;
it's the future that I care about now. I want to put things right
between us--as they ought to be between father and son. You understand
me, I hope?'

Michael nodded, keeping his eyes upon the ground. Again there was a
silence, then Joseph said that if Jane would come in and speak a few
words--so as to make things home-like--it would be time for him to take
his leave for the present. At her grandfather's summons Jane entered
the room. She was still oppressed by the strangeness of her position,
and with difficulty took part in the colloquy. Joseph, still touching
the note of humility in his talk, eyed his relatives alternately, and
exhibited reluctance to quit them.

When he returned to the Close, it was with a face expressing
dissatisfaction. Clem's eager inquiries he met at first with an
ill-tempered phrase or two, which informed her of nothing; but when
dinner was over he allowed himself to be drawn into a confidential
talk, in which Mrs. Peckover took part. The old man, he remarked, was
devilish close; it looked as if 'some game was on.' Mrs. Peckover
ridiculed this remark; of course there was a game on; she spoke of
Sidney Kirkwood, the influence he had obtained over Snowdon, the
designs he was obviously pursuing. If Joseph thought he would recover
his rights, at this time of day, save by direct measures, it only
proved how needful it was for him to be instructed by shrewd people.
The old man was a hard nut to crack; why he lived in Hanover Street,
and sent Jane to work, when it was certain that he had wealth at
command, Mrs. Peckover could not pretend to explain, but in all
probability he found a pleasure in accumulating money, and was abetted
therein by Sidney Kirkwood. Clem could bear witness that Jane always
seemed to have secrets to hide; nevertheless a good deal of information
had been extracted from the girl during the last year or so, and it all
went to confirm the views which Mrs. Peckover now put forth. After long
discussion, it was resolved that Joseph should call upon the lawyers
whose names had appeared in the advertisement addressed to himself. If
he was met with any shuffling, or if they merely referred him to his
father, the next step would be plain enough.

Clem began to exhibit sullenness; her words were few, and it was
fortunate for Joseph that he could oppose a philosophical indifference
to the trouble with which his honeymoon was threatened. As early as
possible on Monday morning he ascended the stairs of a building in
Furnival's Inn and discovered the office of Messrs. Percival and Feel.
He was hesitating whether to knock or simply turn the handle, when a
man came up to the same door, with the quick step of one at home in the
place.

'Business with us?' inquired the newcomer, as Joseph drew back.

They looked at each other. He who had spoken was comparatively a young
man, dressed with much propriety, gravely polite in manner.Of

'Ha! How do you do?' exclaimed Snowdon, with embarrassment, and in an
undertone. 'I wasn't expecting--'

The recognition was mutual, and whilst Joseph, though disconcerted,
expressed his feelings in a familiar smile, the other cast a quick
glance of uneasiness towards the stairs, his mouth compressed, his
eyebrows twitching a little.

'Business with Mr. Percival?' he inquired confidentially, but without
Joseph's familiar accentuation.

'Yes. That is--Is he here?'

'Won't be for another hour. Anything I could see about for you?'

Joseph moved in uncertainty, debating with himself. Their eyes met
again.

'Well, we might have a word or two about it,' he said. 'Better meet
somewhere else, perhaps?'

'Could you be at the top of Chancery Lane at six o'clock?'

With a look of mutual understanding, they parted. Joseph went home, and
explained that, to his surprise, he had found an old acquaintance at
the lawyer's office, a man named Scawthorne, whom lie was going to see
in private before having an interview with the lawyer himself. At six
o'clock the appointed meeting took place, and from Chancery Lane the
pair walked to a quiet house of refreshment in the vicinity of
Lincoln's Inn Fields. On the way they exchanged a few insignificant
remarks, having reference to a former intimacy and a period during
which they had not come across each other. Established in a
semi-private room, with a modest stimulant to aid conversation, they
became more at ease; Mr. Scawthorne allowed himself a discreet smile,
and Joseph, fingering his glass, broached the matter at issue with a
cautious question.

'Do you know anything of a man called Snowdon?'

'What Snowdon?'

'Joseph James Snowdon--a friend of mine. Your people advertised for him
about three years ago. Perhaps you haven't been at the office as long
as that?'

'Oh yes. I remember the name. What about him?'

'Your people wanted to find him--something to his advantage. Do you
happen to know whether it's any use his coming forward now?'

Mr. Scawthorne was not distinguished by directness of gaze. He had
handsome features, and a not unpleasant cast of countenance, but
something, possibly the habit of professional prudence, made his regard
coldly, fitfully, absently observant. It was markedly so as he turned
his face towards Joseph whilst the latter was speaking. After a
moment's silence he remarked, without emphasis:

'A relative of yours, you said?'

'No, I said a friend--intimate friend. Polkenhorne knows him too.'

'Does he? I haven't seen Polkenhorne for a long time.'

'You don't care to talk about the business? Perhaps you'd better
introduce me to Mr. Percival.'

'By the name of Camden?'

'Hang it! I may as well tell you at once. Snowdon is my own name.'

'Indeed? And how am I to be sure of that?'

'Come and see me where I'm living, in Clerkenwell Close, and then make
inquiries of my father, in Hanover Street, Islington. There's no reason
now for keeping up the old name--a little affair--all put right. But
the fact is, I'd as soon find out what this business is with your
office without my father knowing. I have reasons; shouldn't mind
talking them over with you, if you can give me the information I want.'

'I can do that,' replied Scawthorne with a smile. 'If you are J. J.
Snowdon, you are requested to communicate with Michael Snowdon--that's
all.'

'Oh! but I _have_ communicated with him, and he's nothing particular to
say to me, as far as I can see.'

Scawthorne sipped at his glass, gave a stroke to each side of his
moustache, and seemed to reflect.

'You were coming to ask Mr. Percival privately for information?'

'That's just it. Of course if you can't give me any, I must see him
to-morrow.'

'He won't tell you anything more than I have.'

'And you don't _know_ anything more?'

'I didn't say that, my dear fellow. Suppose you begin by telling me a
little more about yourself?'

It was a matter of time, but at length the dialogue took another
character. The glasses of stimulant were renewed, and as Joseph grew
expansive Scawthorne laid aside something of his professional reserve,
without, however, losing the discretion which led him to subdue his
voice and express himself in uncompromising phrases. Their sitting
lasted about an hour, and before taking leave of each other they
arranged for a meeting at a different place in the course of a few days.

Joseph walked homewards with deliberation, in absent mood, his
countenance alternating strangely between a look of mischievous
jocoseness and irritable concern; occasionally he muttered to himself.
Just before reaching the Close he turned into a public-house; when he
came forth the malicious smile was on his face, and he walked with the
air of a man who has business of moment before him. He admitted himself
to the house.

'That you, Jo?' cried Clem's voice from upstairs.

'Me, sure enough,' was the reply, with a chuckle. 'Come up sharp, then.'

Humming a tune, Joseph ascended to the sitting-room on the first floor,
and threw himself on a seat. His wife stood just in front of him, her
sturdy arms a-kimbo; her look was fiercely expectant, answering in some
degree to the smile with which he looked here and there.

'Well, can't you speak?'

'No hurry, Mrs. Clem; no hurry, my dear. It's all right. The old man's
rolling in money.'

'And what about your share?'

Joseph laughed obstreperously, his wife's brow lowering the while.

'Just tell me, can't you?' she cried.

'Of course I will. The best joke you ever heard. You had yours
yesterday, Mrs. Clem; my turn comes to-day. My share is--just nothing
at all. Not a penny! Not a cent! Swallow that, old girl, and tell me
how it tastes.'

'You're a liar!' shouted the other, her face flushing scarlet, her eyes
aflame with rage.

'Never told a lie in my life,' replied her husband, still laughing
noisily. But for that last glass of cordial on the way home he could
scarcely have enjoyed so thoroughly the dramatic flavour of the
situation. Joseph was neither a bully nor a man of courage; the joke
with which he was delighting himself was certainly a rich one, but it
had its element of danger, and only by abandoning himself to riotous
mirth could he overcome the nervousness with which Clem's fury
threatened to affect him. She, coming forward in the attitude of an
enraged fishwife, for a few moments made the room ring with foul abuse,
that vituperative vernacular of the nether world, which has never yet
been exhibited by typography, and presumably never will be.

'Go it, Clem!' cried her husband, pushing his chair a little back. 'Go
it, my angel! When you've eased your mind a little, I'll explain how it
happens.'

She became silent, glaring at him with murderous eyes. But just at that
moment Mrs. Peckover put her head in at the door, inquiring 'What's up?'

'Come in, if you want to know,' cried her daughter. 'See what you've
let me in for! Didn't I tell you as it might be all a mistake? Oh yes,
you may look!'

Mrs. Peckover was startled; her small, cunning eyes went rapidly from
Clem to Joseph, and she fixed the latter with a gaze of angry suspicion.

'Got a bit of news for you, mother,' resumed Joseph, nodding. 'You and
Clem were precious artful, weren't you now? It's my turn now. Thought
I'd got money--ha, ha!'

'And so you have,' replied Mrs. Peckover. 'We know all about it, so you
needn't try your little game.'

'Know all about it, do you? Well, see here. My brother Mike died out in
Australia, and his son died at the same time--they was drowned. Mike
left no will, and his wife was dead before him. What's the law, eh?
Pity you didn't make sure of that. Why, all his money went to the old
man, every cent of it. I've no claim on a penny. That's the law, my
pretty dears!'

'He's a ---- liar!' roared Clem, who at the best of times would have
brought small understanding to a legal question. 'What did my brother
say in his letter?'

'He was told wrong, that's all, or else he got the idea out of his own
head.'

'Then why did they advertise for you?' inquired Mrs. Peckover, keeping
perfect command of her temper.

'The old man thought he'd like to find his son again, that's all. Ha,
ha! Why can't you take it good-humoured, Clem? You had your joke
yesterday, and you can't say I cut up rough about it. I'm a
good-natured fellow, I am. There's many a man would have broke every
bone in your body, my angel, you just remember that!'

It rather seemed as if the merry proceeding would in this case be
reversed; Joseph had risen, and was prepared to defend himself from an
onslaught. But Mrs. Peckover came between the newly-wedded pair, and by
degrees induced Clem to take a calmer view of the situation, or at all
events to postpone her vengeance. It was absurd, she argued, to act as
if the matter were hopeless. Michael Snowdon would certainly leave
Joseph money in his will, if only the right steps were taken to secure
his favour. Instead of quarrelling, they must put their heads together
and scheme. She had her ideas; let them listen to her.

'Clem, you go and get a pot of old six for supper, and don't be such a
---- fool,' was her final remark.




CHAPTER XIX

A RETREAT

Visiting his friends as usual on Sunday evening, Sidney Kirkwood felt,
before he had been many minutes in the room, that something unwonted
was troubling the quiet he always found here. Michael Snowdon was
unlike himself, nervously inattentive, moving frequently, indisposed to
converse on any subject. Neither had Jane her accustomed brightness,
and the frequent glances she east at her grandfather seemed to show
that the latter's condition was causing her anxiety. She withdrew very
early, and, as at once appeared, in order that Sidney might hear in
private what had that day happened. The story of Clem Peckover's
marriage naturally occasioned no little astonishment in Sidney.

'And how will all this affect Jane?' he asked involuntarily.

'That is what I cannot tell,' replied Michael. 'It troubles me. My son
is a stranger; all these years have made him quite a different man from
what I remember; and the worst is, I can no longer trust myself to
judge him. Yet I must know the truth--Sidney, I must know the truth.
It's hard to speak ill of the only son left to me out of the four I
once had, but if I think of him as he was seventeen years ago--no, no,
he must have changed as he has grown older. But you must help me to
know him, Sidney.'

And in a very few days Sidney had his first opportunity of observing
Jane's father. At this meeting Joseph seemed to desire nothing so much
