
'Have you heard any talk about the Burial Club?' inquired the man, in a
low voice of suspicion, knitting his eyebrows.

'Heard anything? No. What?'

'Why, Dick Smales says he can't get the money for his boy, as died last
week.'

'Can't get it? Why not?'

'That's just what I want to know. Some o' the chaps is talkin' about it
upstairs. M'Cosh ain't been seen for four or five days. Somebody had
news as he was ill in bed, and now there's no findin' him. I've got a
notion there's something wrong, my boy.'

Hewett's eyes grew large and the muscles of his mouth contracted.

'Where's Jenkins?' he asked abruptly. 'I suppose he can explain it?'

'No, by God, he can't! He won't say nothing, but he's been runnin'
about all yesterday and to-day, lookin' precious queer.'

Without paying any further attention to Snowdon, John left the room
with his companion, and they went upstairs. Most of the men present
were members of the Burial Club in question, an institution of some
fifteen years' standing and in connection with the club which met here
for social and political purposes; they were in the habit, like John
Hewett, of depositing their coppers weekly, thus insuring themselves or
their relatives for a sum payable at death. The rumour that something
was wrong, that the secretary M'Cosh could not be found, began to
create a disturbance; presently the nigger entertainment came to an
end, and the Burial Club was the sole topic of conversation.

On the morrow it was an ascertained fact that one of the catastrophes
which occasionally befall the provident among wage-earners had come to
pass. Investigation showed that for a long time there had been
carelessness and mismanagement of funds, and that fraud had completed
the disaster. M'Cosh was wanted by the police.

To John Hewett the blow was a terrible one. In spite of his poverty, he
had never fallen behind with those weekly payments. The thing he
dreaded supremely was, that his wife or one of the children should die
and he be unable to provide a decent burial. At the death of the last
child born to him the club had of course paid, and the confidence he
felt in it for the future was a sensible support under the many
miseries of his life, a support of which no idea can be formed by one
who has never foreseen the possibility of those dear to him being
carried to a pauper's grave. It was a touching fact that he still kept
up the payment for Clara; who could say but his daughter might yet come
back to him to die? To know that he had lost that one stronghold
against fate was a stroke that left him scarcely strength to go about
his daily work.

And he could not breathe a word of it to his wife. Oh that better curse
of poverty, which puts corrupting poison into the wounds inflicted by
nature, which outrages the spirit's tenderness, which profanes with
unutterable defilement the secret places of the mourning heart! He
could not, durst not, speak a word of this misery to her whose
gratitude and love had resisted every trial, who had shared
uncomplainingly all the evil of his lot, and had borne with supreme
patience those added sufferings of which he had no conception. For she
lay on her deathbed. The doctor told him so on the very day when he
learnt that it would be out of his power to discharge the fitting
pieties at her grave. So far from looking to her for sympathy, it
behoved him to keep from her as much as a suspicion of what had
happened.

Their home at this time was a kitchen in King's Cross Road. The eldest
child, Amy, was now between ten and eleven; Annie was nine; Tom seven.
These, of course, went to school every day, and were being taught to
appreciate the woefulness of their inheritance. Amy was, on the whole,
a good girl; she could make purchases as well as her mother, and when
in the mood, look carefully after her little brother and sister; but
already she had begun to display restiveness under the hard discipline
to which the domestic poverty subjected her. Once she had played truant
from school, and told falsehoods to the teachers to explain her
absence. It was discovered that she had been tempted by other girls to
go and see the Lord Mayor's show. Annie and Tom threatened to be
troublesome when they got a little older; the boy could not be taught
to speak the truth, and his sister was constantly committing petty
thefts of jam, sugar, even coppers; and during the past year their
mother was seldom able to exert herself in correcting these faults.
Only by dint of struggle which cost her agonies could she discharge the
simplest duties of home. She made a brave fight against disease and
penury and incessant dread of the coming day, but month after month her
strength failed. Now at length she tried vainly to leave her bed. The
last reserve of energy was exhausted, and the end near.

After her death, what then? Through the nights of this week after her
doom had been spoken she lay questioning the future. She knew that but
for her unremitting efforts Hewett would have yielded to the despair of
a drunkard; the crucial moment was when he found himself forsaken by
his daughter, and no one but this poor woman could know what force of
loving will, what entreaties, what tears, had drawn him back a little
way from the edge of the gulf. Throughout his life until that day of
Clara's disappearance he had seemed in no danger from the deadliest
enemy of the poor; one taste of the oblivion that could be bought at
any street-corner, and it was as though drinking had been a recognised
habit with him. A year, two years, and he still drank himself into
forgetfulness as often as his mental suffering waxed unendurable. On
the morrow of every such crime--interpret the word rightly--he hated
himself for his cruelty to that pale sufferer whose reproaches were
only the utterances of love. The third year saw an improvement, whether
owing to conscious self-control or to the fact that time was blunting
his affliction. Instead of the public-house, he frequented all places
where the woes of the nether world found fierce expression. He became a
constant speaker at the meetings on Clerkenwell Green and at the
Radical clubs. The effect upon him of this excitement was evil enough,
yet not so evil as the malady of drink. Mrs. Hewett was thankful for
the alternative. But when she was no longer at his side--what then?

His employment was irregular, but for the most part at cabinet-making.
The workshop where he was generally to be found was owned by two
brothers, who invariably spent the first half of each week in steady
drinking. Their money gone, they set to work and made articles of
furniture, which on Saturday they took round to the shops of small
dealers and sold for what they could get. When once they took up their
tools, these men worked with incredible persistency, and they expected
the same exertion from those they employed. 'I wouldn't give a ---- for
the chap as can't do his six-and-thirty hours at the bench!' remarked
one of them on the occasion of a workman falling into a fainting-fit,
caused by utter exhaustion. Hewett was anything but strong, and he
earned little.

Late on Saturday afternoon, Sidney Kirkwood and his friends were back
in London. As he drew near to Tysoe Street, carrying the bag which was
all the luggage he had needed, Sidney by chance encountered Joseph
Snowdon, who, after inquiring about his relatives, said that he had
just come from visiting the Hewetts. Mrs. Hewett was very ill indeed;
and it was scarcely to be expected she would live more than a few days.

'You mean that?' exclaimed Kirkwood, upon whom, after his week of
holiday and of mental experiences which seemed to have changed the face
of the world for him, this sudden announcement came with a painful
shock, reviving all the miserable past. 'She is dying?'

'There's no doubt of it.'

And Joseph added his belief that John Hewett would certainly not take
it ill if the other went there before it was too late.

Sidney had no appetite now for the meal he would have purchased on
reaching home. A profound pity for the poor woman who had given him so
many proofs of her affection made his heart heavy almost to tears. The
perplexities of the present vanished in a revival of old tenderness, of
bygone sympathies and sorrows. He could not doubt but that it was his
duty to go to his former friends at a time such as this. Perhaps, if he
had overcome his pride, he might have sooner brought the estrangement
to an end.

He did not know, and had forgotten to ask of Snowdon, the number of the
house in King's Cross Road where the Hewetts lived. He could find it,
however, by visiting Pennyloaf. Conquering his hesitation, he was on
the point of going forth, when his landlady came up and told him that a
young girl wished to see him. It was Amy Hewett, and her face told him
on what errand she had come.

'Mr. Kirkwood,' she began, looking up with embarrassment, for he was
all but a stranger to her now, 'mother wants to know if you'd come and
see her. She's very bad; they're afraid she's--'

The word was choked. Amy had been crying, and the tears again rose to
her eyes.

'I was just coming,' Sidney answered, as he took her hand and pressed
it kindly.

They crossed Wilmington Square and descended by the streets that slope
to Coldbath Fields Prison. The cellar in which John Hewett and his
family were housed was underneath a milk-shop; Amy led the way down
stone steps from the pavement of the street into an area, where more
than two people would have had difficulty in standing together. Sidney
saw that the window which looked upon this space was draped with a
sheet. By an open door they entered a passage, then came to the door of
the room. Amy pushed it open, and showed that a lamp gave light within.

To poor homes Sidney Kirkwood was no stranger, but a poorer than this
now disclosed to him he had never seen. The first view of it made him
draw in his breath, as though a pang went through him. Hewett was not
here. The two younger children were sitting upon a mattress, eating
bread. Amy stepped up to the bedside and bent to examine her mother's
face.

'I think she's asleep,' she whispered, turning round to Sidney.

Sleep, or loath? It might well be the latter, for anything Sidney could
determine to the contrary. The face he could not recognise, or only
when he had gazed at it for several minutes. Oh, pitiless world, that
pursues its business and its pleasure, that takes its fill of life from
the rising to the going down of the sun, and within sound of its
clamour is this hiding-place of anguish and desolation!

'Mother, here's Mr. Kirkwood.'

Repeated several times, the words at length awoke consciousness. The
dying woman could not move her head from the pillow; her eyes wandered,
but in the end rested upon Sidney. He saw an expression of surprise, of
anxiety, then a smile of deep contentment.

'I knew you'd come. I did so want to see you. Don't go just yet, will
you?'

The lump in his throat hindered Sidney from replying. Hot tears, an
agony in the shedding, began to stream down his cheeks.

'Where's John?' she continued, trying to look about the room. 'Amy,
where's your father? He'll come soon, Sidney. I want you and him to be
friends again. He knows he'd never ought to a' said what he did. Don't
take on so, Sidney! There'll be Amy to look after the others. She'll be
a good girl. She's promised me. It's John I'm afraid for. If only he
can keep from drink. Will you try and help him, Sidney?'

There was a terrible earnestness of appeal in the look she fixed upon
him. Sidney replied that he would hold nothing more sacred than the
charge she gave him.

'It'll be easier for them to live,' continued the feeble voice. 'I've
been ill so long, and there's been so much expense. Amy'll be earning
something before long.'

'Don't trouble,' Sidney answered. 'They shall never want as long as I
live--never!'

'Sidney, come a bit nearer. Do you know anything about _her_?'

He shook his head.

'If ever--if ever she comes back, don't turn away from her--will you?'

'I would welcome her as I would a sister of my own.'

'There's such hard things in a woman's life. What would a' become of
me, if John hadn't took pity on me! The world's a hard place; I should
be glad to leave it, if it wasn't for them as has to go on in their
trouble. I knew you'd come when I sent Amy. Oh, I feel that easier in
my mind!'

'Why didn't you send long before? No, it's my fault. Why didn't I come?
Why didn't I come?'

There was a footstep in the passage, a slow, uncertain step; then the
door moved a little. With blurred vision Sidney saw Hewett enter and
come forward. They grasped each other's hands without speaking, and
John, as though his strength were at an end, dropped upon the chair by
the bedside. For the last four or five nights he had sat there; if he
got half an hour's painful slumber now and then it was the utmost. His
face was like that of some prisoner, whom the long torture of a foul
dungeon has brought to the point of madness. He uttered only a few
words during the half-hour that Sidney still remained in the room. The
latter, when Mrs. Hewett's relapse into unconsciousness made it useless
for him to stay, beckoned Amy to follow him out into the area and put
money in her hand, begging her to get whatever was needed without
troubling her father. He would come again in the morning.

Mrs. Hewett died just before daybreak without a pang, as though death
had compassion on her. When Sidney came, about nine o'clock, he found
Amy standing at the door of the milk-shop; the people who kept it had
brought the children up into their room. Hewett still sat by the bed;
seeing Kirkwood, he pointed to the hidden face.

'How am I to bury her?' he whispered hoarsely. 'Haven't you heard about
it? They've stole the club-money; they've robbed me of it; I haven't as
much as'll pay for her coffin.'

Sidney fancied at first that the man's mind was wandering, but Hewett
took out of his pocket a scrap of newspaper in which the matter was
briefly reported.

'See, it's there. I've known since last Sunday, and I had to keep it
from her. No need to be afraid of speakin' now. They've robbed me, and
I haven't as much as'll pay for her coffin. It's a nice blasted world,
this is, where they won't let you live, and then make you pay if you
don't want to be buried like a dog! She's had nothing but pain and
poverty all her life, and now they'll pitch her out of the way in a
parish box. Do you remember what hopes I used to have when we were
first married? See the end of 'em--look at this underground hole--look
at this bed as she lays on! Is it my fault? By God, I wonder I haven't
killed myself before this! I've been drove mad, I tell you--mad! It's
well if I don't do murder yet; every man as I see go by with a good
coat on his back and a face fat with good feeding, it's all I can do to
keep from catchin' his throat an tearin' the life out of him!'

'Let's talk about the burial,' interposed Sidney. 'Make your mind at
ease. I've got enough to pay for all that, and you must let me lend you
what you want.'

'Lend me money? You as I haven't spoke to for years?'

'The more fault mine. I ought to have come back again long since; you
wouldn't have refused an old friend that never meant an unkindness to
you.'

'No, it was me as was to blame,' said the other, with choking voice.
'She always told me so, and she always said what was right. But I can't
take it of you, Sidney; I can't! Lend it? An' where am I goin' to get
it from to pay you back? It won't be so long before I lie like she does
there. It's getting too much for me.'

The first tears he had shed rose at this generosity of the man he had
so little claim upon. His passionate grief and the spirit of rebellion,
which grew more frenzied as he grew older, were subdued to a sobbing
gratitude for the kindness which visited him in his need. Nerveless,
voiceless, he fell back again upon the chair and let his head lie by
that of the dead woman.




CHAPTER XXII

WATCHING FROM AMBUSH

Mr. Joseph Snowdon, though presenting a calm countenance to the world
and seeming to enjoy comparative prosperity, was in truth much harassed
by the difficulties of his position. Domestic troubles he had
anticipated, but the unforeseen sequel of his marriage resulted in a
martyrdom at the hands of Clem and her mother such as he had never
dreamed of. His faults and weaknesses distinctly those of the civilised
man, he found himself in disastrous alliance with two savages, whose
characters so supplemented each other as to constitute in unison a
formidable engine of tyranny. Clem--suspicious, revengeful, fierce,
watching with cruel eyes every opportunity of taking payment on account
for the ridicule to which she had exposed herself; Mrs.
Peckover--ceaselessly occupied with the basest scheming, keen as an
Indian on any trail she happened to strike, excited by the scent of
money as a jackal by that of carrion; for this pair Joseph was no
match. Not only did they compel him to earn his daily bread by dint of
methodical effort such as was torture to his indolent disposition, but,
moreover, in pursuance of Mrs. Peckover's crafty projects, he was
constrained to an assiduous hypocrisy in his relations with Michael and
Jane which wearied him beyond measure. Joseph did not belong to the
most desperate class of hungry mortals; he had neither the large
ambitions and the passionate sensual desires which make life an
unending fever, nor was he possessed with that foul itch of
covetousness which is the explanation of the greater part of the
world's activity. He understood quite sufficiently the advantages of
wealth, and was prepared to go considerable lengths for the sake of
enjoying them, but his character lacked persistence. This defect
explained the rogueries and calamities of his life. He had brains in
abundance, and a somewhat better education would have made of him
either a successful honest man or a rascal of superior scope--it is
always a toss-up between these two results where a character such as
his is in question. Ever since he abandoned the craft to which his
father had had him trained, he had lived on his wits; there would be
matter for a volume in the history of his experiences at home and
abroad, a volume infinitely more valuable considered as a treatise on
modern civilisation than any professed work on that subject in
existence. With one episode only in his past can we here concern
ourselves; the retrospect is needful to make clear his relations with
Mr. Scawthorne.

On his return from America, Joseph possessed a matter of a hundred
pounds; the money was not quite legally earned (pray let us reserve the
word honesty for a truer use than the common one), and on the whole he
preferred to recommence life in the old country under a pseudonym--that
little affair of the desertion of his child would perhaps, in any case,
have made this advisable. A hundred pounds will not go very far, but
Joseph took care to be well dressed, and allowed it to be surmised by
those with whom he came in contact that the resources at his command
were considerable. In early days, as we know, he had worked at
electroplating, and the natural bent of his intellect was towards
mechanical and physical science; by dint of experimenting at his old
pursuit, he persuaded himself, or at all events attained plausibility
for the persuading of others, that he had discovered a new and valuable
method of plating with nickel, He gave it out that he was in search of
a partner to join him in putting this method into practice. Gentlemen
thus situated naturally avail themselves of the advertisement columns
of the newspaper, and Joseph by this means had the happiness to form an
acquaintance with one Mr. Polkenhorne, who, like himself, had sundry
schemes for obtaining money without toiling for it in the usual vulgar
way. Polkenhorne was a man of thirty-five, much of a blackguard, but
keen-witted, handsome, and tolerably educated; the son of a Clerkenwell
clockmaker, he had run through an inheritance of a few thousand pounds,
and made no secret of his history--spoke of his experiences, indeed,
with a certain pride. Between these two a close intimacy sprang up, one
of those partnerships, beginning with mutual deception, which are so
common in the border-land of enterprise just skirting the criminal
courts. Polkenhorne resided at this time in Kennington; he was
married--or said that he was--to a young lady in the theatrical
profession, known to the public as Miss Grace Danver. To Mrs.
Polkenhorne, or Miss Danver, Joseph soon had the honour of being
presented, for she was just then playing at a London theatre; he found
her a pretty but consumptive-looking girl, not at all likely to achieve
great successes, earning enough, however, to support Mr. Polkenhorne
during this time of his misfortunes--a most pleasant and natural
arrangement.

Polkenhorne's acquaintances were numerous, but, as he informed Joseph,
most of them were 'played out,' that is to say, no further use could be
made of them from Polkenhorne's point of view. One, however, as yet
imperfectly known, promised to be useful, perchance as a victim, more
probably as an ally; his name was Scawthorne, and Polkenhorne had come
across him in consequence of a friendship existing between Grace Danver
and Mrs. Scawthorne--at all events, a young lady thus known--who was
preparing herself for the stage. This gentleman was 'something in the
City;' he had rather a close look, but proved genial enough, and was
very ready to discuss things in general with Mr. Polkenhorne and his
capitalist friend Mr. Camden, just from the United States.

A word or two about Charles Henry Scawthorne, of the circumstances
which made him what you know, or what you conjecture. His father had a
small business as a dyer in Islington, and the boy, leaving school at
fourteen, was sent to become a copying-clerk in a solicitor's office;
his tastes were so strongly intellectual that it seemed a pity to put
him to work he hated, and the clerkship was the best opening that could
be procured for him. Two years after, Mr. Scawthorne died; his wife
tried to keep on the business, but soon failed, and thenceforth her son
had to support her as well as himself. From sixteen to three-and-twenty
was the period of young Scawthorne's life which assured his future
advancement--and his moral ruin. A grave, gentle, somewhat effeminate
boy, with a great love of books and a wonderful power of application to
study, he suffered so much during those years of early maturity, that,
as in almost all such eases, his nature was corrupted. Pity that some
self-made intellectual man of our time has not flung in the world's
teeth a truthful autobiography. Scawthorne worked himself up to a
position which had at first seemed unattainable; what he paid for the
success was loss of all his pure ideals, of his sincerity, of his
disinterestedness, of the fine perceptions to which he was born.
Probably no one who is half-starved and overworked during those
critical years comes out of the trial with his moral nature uninjured;
to certain characters it is a wrong irreparable. To stab the root of a
young tree, to hang crushing burdens upon it, to rend off its early
branches--that is not the treatment likely to result in growth such as
nature purposed. There will come of it a vicious formation, and the
principle applies also to the youth of men.

Scawthorne was fond of the theatre; as soon as his time of incessant
toll was over, he not only attended performances frequently, but
managed to make personal acquaintance with sundry theatrical people.
Opportunity for this was afforded by his becoming member of a club,
consisting chiefly of solicitors' clerks, which was frequently honoured
by visits from former associates who had taken to the stage; these
happy beings would condescend to recite at times, to give help in
getting up a dramatic entertainment, and soon, in this way, Scawthorne
came to know an old actor named Drake, who supported himself by
instructing novices, male and female, in his own profession; one of Mr.
Drake's old pupils was Miss Grace Danver, in whom, as soon as he met
her, Scawthorne recognised the Grace Rudd of earlier days. And it was
not long after this that he brought to Mr. Drake a young girl of
interesting appearance, but very imperfect education, who fancied she
had a turn for acting; he succeeded in arranging for her instruction,
and a year and a half later she obtained her first engagement at a
theatre in Scotland. The name she adopted was Clara Vale. Joseph
Snowdon saw her once or twice before she left London, and from Grace
Danver he heard that Grace and she had been schoolfellows in
Clerkenwell. These facts revived in his memory when he afterwards heard
Clem speak of Clara Hewett.

Nothing came of the alliance between Polkenhorne and Joseph; when the
latter's money was exhausted, they naturally fell apart. Joseph made a
living in sundry precarious ways, but at length sank into such straits
that he risked the step of going to Clerkenwell Close. Personal
interest in his child he had then none whatever; his short married life
seemed an episode in the remote past, recalled with indifference. But
in spite of his profound selfishness, it was not solely from the
speculative point of view that he regarded Jane, when he had had time
to realise that she was his daughter, and in a measure to appreciate
her character. With the merely base motives which led him to seek her
affection and put him at secret hostility with Sidney Kirkwood, there
mingled before long a strain of feeling which was natural and pure; he
became a little jealous of his father and of Sidney on other grounds
than those of self-interest. Intolerable as his home was, no wonder
that he found it a pleasant relief to spend an evening in Hanover
Street; he never came away without railing at himself for his
imbecility in having married Clem. For the present he had to plot with
his wife and Mrs. Peckover, but only let the chance for plotting
_against_ them offer itself! The opportunity might come. In the
meantime, the great thing was to postpone the marriage--he had no doubt
it was contemplated--between Jane and Sidney. That would be little less
than a fatality.

The week that Jane spent in Essex was of course a time of desperate
anxiety with Joseph; immediately on her return he hastened to assure
himself that things remained as before. It seemed to him that Jane's
greeting had more warmth than she was wont to display when they met;
sundry other little changes in her demeanour struck him at the same
interview, and he was rather surprised that she had not so much
blitheness as before she went away. But his speculation on minutiae
such as these was suddenly interrupted a day or two later by news which
threw him into a state of excitement; Jane sent word that her
grandfather was very unwell, that he appeared to have caught a chill in
the journey home, and could not at present leave his bed. For a week
the old man suffered from feverish symptoms, and, though he threw off
the ailment, it was in a state of much feebleness that he at length
resumed the ordinary tenor of his way. Jane had of course stayed at
home to nurse him; a fortnight, a month passed, and Michael still kept
her from work. Then it happened that, on Joseph's looking in one
evening, the old man said quietly, 'I think I'd rather Jane stayed at
home in future. We've had a long talk about it this afternoon.'

Joseph glanced at his daughter, who met the look very gravely. He had a
feeling that the girl was of a sudden grown older; when she spoke it
was in brief phrases, and with but little of her natural spontaneity;
noiseless as always in her movements, she walked with a staider gait,
held herself less girlishly, and on saying good-night she let her cheek
rest for a moment against her father's, a thing she had never yet done.

The explanation of it all came a few minutes after Jane's retirement.
Michael, warned by his illness bow unstable was the tenure on which he
henceforth held his life, had resolved to have an end of mystery and
explain to his son all that he had already made known to Sidney
Kirkwood. With Jane he had spoken a few hours ago, revealing to her the
power that was in his hands, the solemn significance he attached to it,
the responsibility with which her future was to be invested. To make
the same things known to Joseph was a task of more difficulty. He could
not here count on sympathetic intelligence; it was but too certain that
his son would listen with disappointment, if not with bitterness. In
order to mitigate the worst results, he began by making known the fact
of his wealth and asking if Joseph had any practical views which could
be furthered by a moderate sum put at his disposal.

'At my death,' he added, 'you'll find that I haven't dealt unkindly by
you. But you're a man of middle age, and I should like to see you in
some fixed way of life before I go.'

Having heard all, Joseph promised to think over the proposal which
concerned himself. It was in a strange state of mind that he returned
to the Close; one thing only he was clear upon, that to Clem and her
mother he would breathe no word of what had been told him. After a
night passed without a wink of sleep, struggling with the amazement,
the incredulity, the confusion of understanding caused by his father's
words, he betook himself to a familiar public-house, and there penned a
note to Scawthorne, requesting an interview as soon as possible. The
meeting took place that evening at the retreat behind Lincoln's Inn
Fields where the two had held colloquies on several occasions during
the last half-year. Scawthorne received with gravity what his
acquaintance had to communicate. Then he observed:

'The will was executed ten days ago.'

'It was? And what's he left me?'

'Seven thousand pounds--less legacy duty.'

'And thirty thousand to Jane?'

'Just so.'

Joseph drew in his breath; his teeth ground together for a moment; his
eyes grew very wide. With a smile Scawthorne proceeded to explain that
Jane's trustees were Mr. Percival, senior, and his son. Should she die
unmarried before attaining her twenty-first birthday, the money
bequeathed to her was to be distributed among certain charities.

'It's my belief there's a crank in the old fellow,' exclaimed Joseph.
'Is he really such a fool as to think Jane won't use the money for
herself? And what about Kirkwood? I tell you what it is; he's a deep
fellow, is Kirkwood. I wish you knew him.'

Scawthorne confessed that he had the same wish, but added that there
was no chance of its being realised; prudence forbade any move in that
direction.

'If he marries her,' questioned Joseph, 'will the money be his?'

'No; it will be settled on her. But it comes to very much the same
thing; there's to be no restraint on her discretion in using it.'

'She might give her affectionate parent a hundred or so now and then,
if she chose?'

'If she chose.'

Scawthorne began a detailed inquiry into the humanitarian projects of
which Joseph had given but a rude and contemptuous explanation. The
finer qualities of his mind enabled him to see the matter in quite a
different light from that in which it presented itself to Jane's
father; he had once or twice had an opportunity of observing Michael
Snowdon at the office, and could realise in a measure the character
which directed its energies to such an ideal aim. Concerning Jane he
asked many questions; then the conversation turned once more to Sidney
Kirkwood.

'I wish he'd married his old sweetheart,' observed Joseph, watching the
other's face.

'Who was that?'

'A girl called Clara Hewett.'

Their looks met. Scawthorne, in spite of habitual self-command,
betrayed an extreme surprise.

'I wonder what's become of her?' continued Joseph, still observing his
companion, and speaking with unmistakable significance.

'Just tell me something about this,' said Scawthorne peremptorily.

Joseph complied, and ended his story with a few more hints.

'I never saw her myself--at least I can't be sure that I did. There was
somebody of the same name--Clara--a friend of Polkenhorne's wife.'

Scawthorne appeared to pay no attention; he mused with a wrinkled brow.

'If only I could put something between Kirkwood and the girl,' remarked
Joseph, as if absently. 'I shouldn't wonder if it could be made worth
some one's while to give a bit of help that way. Don't you think so?'

In the tone of one turning to a different subject, Scawthorne asked
suddenly:

'What use are you going to make of your father's offer?'

'Well, I'm not quite sure, Shouldn't wonder if I go in for filters.'

'Filters?'

Joseph explained. In the capacity of 'commission agent'--denomination
which includes and apologises for such a vast variety of casual
pursuits--he had of late been helping to make known to the public a new
filter, which promised to be a commercial success. The owner of the
patent lacked capital, and a judicious investment might secure a share
in the business; Joseph thought of broaching the subject with him next
day.

'You won't make a fool of yourself?' remarked Scawthorne.

'Trust me; I think I know my way about.'

For the present these gentlemen had nothing more to say to each other;
they emptied their glasses with deliberation, exchanged a look which
might mean either much or nothing, and so went their several ways.

The filter project was put into execution. When Joseph had communicated
it in detail to his father, the latter took the professional advice of
his friend Mr. Percival, and in the course of a few weeks Joseph found
himself regularly established in a business which had the--for
him--novel characteristic of serving the purposes of purity. The
manufactory was situated in a by-street on the north of Euston Road: a
small concern, but at all events a genuine one. On the window of the
office you read, 'Lake, Snowdon, & Co.' As it was necessary to account
for this achievement to Clem and Mrs. Peckover, Joseph made known to
them a part of the truth; of the will he said nothing, and, for reasons
of his own, he allowed these tender relatives to believe that he was in
a fair way to inherit the greater part of Michael's possessions. There
was jubilation in Clerkenwell Close, but mother and daughter kept stern
watch upon Joseph's proceedings.

Another acquaintance of ours benefited by this event. Michael made it a
stipulation that some kind of work should be found at the factory for
John Hewett, who, since his wife's death, had been making a wretched
struggle to establish a more decent home for the children. The firm of
Lake, Snowdon, & Co. took Hewett into their employment as a porter, and
paid him twenty-five shillings a week--of which sum, however, the odd
five shillings were privately made up by Michael. On receiving this
appointment, John drew the sigh of a man who finds himself in haven
after perilous beating about a lee shore. The kitchen in King's Cross
Bead was abandoned, and with Sidney Kirkwood's aid the family found
much more satisfactory quarters. Friends of Sidney's, a man and wife of
middle age without children, happened to be looking for lodgings: it
was decided that they and John Hewett should join in the tenancy of a
fiat, up on the fifth storey of the huge block of tenements called
Farringdon Road Buildings. By this arrangement the children would be
looked after, and the weekly twenty-five shillings could be made to go
much further than on the ordinary system. As soon as everything had
been settled, and when Mr. and Mrs. Eagles had already housed
themselves in the one room which was all they needed for their private
accommodation, Hewett and the children began to pack together their
miserable sticks and rags for removal. Just then Sidney Kirkwood looked
in.

'Eagles wants to see you for a minute about something,' he said. 'Just
walk round with me, will you?'

John obeyed, in the silent, spiritless way now usual with him. It was
but a short distance to the buildings: they went up the winding stone
staircase, and Sidney gave a hollow-sounding knock at one of the two
doors that faced each other on the fifth storey. Mrs. Eagles opened, a
decent, motherly woman, with a pleasant and rather curious smile on her
face. She led the way into one of the rooms which John had seen empty
only a few hours ago. How was this? Oil-cloth on the floor, a blind at
the window, a bedstead, a table, a chest of drawers--

Mrs. Eagles withdrew, discreetly. Hewett stood with a look of uneasy
wonderment, and at length turned to his companion.

'Now, look here,' he growled, in an unsteady voice, 'what's all this
about?'

'Somebody seems to have got here before you,' replied Sidney, smiling.

'How the devil am I to keep any self-respect if you go on treatin' me
in this fashion?' blustered John, hanging his head.

'It isn't my doing, Mr. Hewett.'

'Whose, then?'

'A friend's. Don't make a fuss. You shall know the person some day.'




CHAPTER XXIII

ON THE EVE OF TRIUMPH

'I have got your letter, but it tells me no more than the last did. Why
don't you say plainly what you mean? I suppose it's something you are
ashamed of. You say that there's a chance for me of earning a large sum
of money, and if you are in earnest, I shall be only too glad to hear
how it's to be done. This life is no better than what I used to lead
years ago; I'm no nearer to getting a good part than I was when I first
began acting, and unless I can get money to buy dresses and all the
rest of it, I may go on for ever at this hateful drudgery. I shall take
nothing more from you: I say it, and I mean it; but as you tell me that
this chance has nothing to do with yourself, let me know what it really
is. For a large sum of money there are few things I wouldn't do. Of
course it's something disgraceful, but you needn't be afraid on that
account; I haven't lost all my pride yet, but I know what I'm fighting
for, and I won't be beaten. Cost what it may, I'll make people hear of
me and talk of me, and I'll pay myself back for all I've gone through.

So write in plain words, or come and see me.

C. V.'

She wrote at a round table, shaky on its central support, in the
parlour of an indifferent lodging-house; the October afternoon drew
towards dusk; the sky hung low and murky, or, rather, was itself
invisible, veiled by the fume of factory chimneys; a wailing wind
rattled the sash and the door. A newly lighted fire refused to flame
cheerfully, half smothered in its own smoke, which every now and then
was blown downwards and out into the room. The letter
finished--scribbled angrily with a bad pen and in pale ink--she put it
into its envelope--'C. H. Scawthorne, Esq.'

Then a long reverie, such as she always fell into when alone and
unoccupied. The face was older, but not greatly changed from that of
the girl who fought her dread fight with temptation, and lost it, in
the lodging at Islington, who, then as now, brooded over the wild
passions in her heart and defied the world that was her enemy. Still a
beautiful face, its haughty characteristics strengthened, the lips a
little more sensual, a little coarser; still the same stamp of
intellect upon the forehead, the same impatient scorn and misery in her
eyes. She asked no one's pity, but not many women breathed at that
moment who knew more of suffering.

For three weeks she had belonged to a company on tour in the northern
counties. In accordance with the modern custom--so beneficial to actors
and the public--their repertory consisted of one play, the famous
melodrama, 'A Secret of the Thames,' recommended to provincial
audiences by its run of four hundred and thirty-seven nights at a
London theatre. These, to be sure, were not the London actors, but
advertisements in local newspapers gave it to be understood that they
'made an _ensemble_ in no respect inferior to that which was so long
the delight of the metropolis.' Starred on the placards was the name of
Mr. Samuel Peel, renowned in the North of England; his was the company,
and his the main glory in the piece. As leading lady he had the
distinguished Miss Erminia Walcott; her part was a trying one, for she
had to be half-strangled by ruffians and flung--most decorously--over
the parapet of London Bridge. In the long list of subordinate
performers occurred two names with which we are familiar, Miss Grace
Danver and Miss Clara Vale. The present evening would be the third and
last in a certain town of Lancashire, one of those remarkable centres
of industry which pollute heaven and earth, and on that account are
spoken of with somewhat more of pride than stirred the Athenian when he
named his Acropolis.

Clara had just risen to stir the fire, compelled to move by the smoke
that was annoying her, when, after a tap at the door, there came in a
young woman of about five-and-twenty, in a plain walking costume, tall,
very slender, pretty, but looking ill. At this moment there was a
slight flush on her cheeks and a brightness in her eyes which obviously
came of some excitement. She paused just after entering and said in an
eager voice, which had a touch of huskiness:

'What do you think? Miss Walcott's taken her hook!'

Clara did not allow herself to be moved at this announcement. For
several days what is called unpleasantness had existed between the
leading lady and the manager: in other words, they had been quarrelling
violently on certain professional matters, and Miss Walcott had
threatened to ruin the tour by withdrawing her invaluable services. The
menace was at last executed, in good earnest, and the cause of Grace
Danver's excitement was that she, as Miss Walcott's understudy, would
to-night, in all probability, be called upon to take the leading part.

'I'm glad to hear it,' Clara replied, very soberly.

'You don't look as if you cared much,' rejoined the other, with a
little irritation.

'What do you want me to do? Am I to scream with joy because the
greatest actress in the world has got her chance at last?'

There was bitterness in the irony. Whatever their friendship in days
gone by, these two were clearly not on the most amiable terms at
present. This was their first engagement in the same company, and it
had needed but a week of association to put a jealousy and ill-feeling
between them which proved fatal to such mutual kindness as they had
previously cherished. Grace, now no less than in her schooldays, was
fond of patronising: as the elder in years and in experience, she
adopted a tone which Clara speedily resented. To heighten the danger of
a conflict between natures essentially incompatible, both were in a
morbid and nervous state, consumed with discontent, sensitive to the
most trifling injury, abandoned to a fierce egoism, which the course of
their lives and the circumstances of their profession kept constantly
inflamed. Grace was of acrid and violent temper; when stung with words
such as Clara was only too apt at using, she speedily lost command of
herself and spoke, or even acted, frantically. Except that she had not
Clara's sensibilities, her lot was the harder of the two; for she knew
herself stricken with a malady which would hunt her unsparingly to the
grave. On her story I have no time to dwell; it was fall of
wretchedness, which had caused her, about a year ago, to make an
attempt at suicide. A little generosity, and Clara might have helped to
soothe the pains of one so much weaker than herself; but noble feeling
was extinct in the girl, or so nearly extinct that a breath of petty
rivalry could make her base, cruel, remorseless.

'At all events I _have_ got my chance!' exclaimed Grace, with a harsh
laugh. 'When you get yours, ask me to congratulate you.'

And she swept her skirts out of the room. In a few minutes Clara put a
stamp on her letter and went out to the post. Her presence at the
theatre would not be necessary for another two hours, but as the
distance was slight, and nervousness would not let her remain at home,
she walked on to make inquiry concerning Grace's news. Rain had just
begun to fall, and with it descended the smut and grime that darkened
above the houses; the pavement was speedily over-smeared with sticky
mud, and passing vehicles flung splashes in every direction. Odours of
oil and shoddy, and all such things as characterised the town, grew
more pungent under the heavy shower. On reaching the stage-door, Clara
found two or three of her companions just within; the sudden departure
of Miss Walcott had become known to everyone, and at this moment Mr.
Peel was holding a council, to which, as the doorkeeper testified, Miss
Danver had been summoned.

The manager decided to make no public announcement of what had happened
before the hour came for drawing up the curtain. A scrappy rehearsal
for the benefit of Grace Danver and the two or three other ladies who
were affected by the necessary rearrangement went on until the last
possible moment, then Mr. Peel presented himself before the drop and
made a little speech. The gallery was fall of mill-hands; in the pit
was a sprinkling of people; the circles and boxes presented half a
dozen occupants. 'Sudden domestic calamity . . . enforced absence of
the lady who played . . . efficient substitution . . . deep regret, but
confidence in the friendly feeling of audience on this last evening.'

They growled, but in the end applauded the actor-manager, who had
succeeded in delicately hinting that, after all, the great attraction
was still present in his own person. The play went very much as usual,
but those behind the scenes were not allowed to forget that Mr. Peel
was in a furious temper: the ladies noticed with satisfaction that more
than once he glared ominously at Miss Danver, who naturally could not
aid him to make his 'points' as Miss Walcott had accustomed herself to
do. At his final exit, it was observed that he shrugged his shoulders
and muttered a few oaths.

Clara had her familiar part; it was a poor one from every point of
view, and the imbecility of the words she had to speak affected her
to-night with exceptional irritation. Clara always acted in ill-humour.
She despised her audience for their acceptance of the playwright's
claptrap; she felt that she could do better than any of the actresses
entrusted with the more important characters; her imagination was for
ever turning to powerful scenes in plays she had studied privately, and
despair possessed her at the thought that she would perhaps never have
a chance of putting forth her strength. Tonight her mood was one of
sullen carelessness; she did little more than 'walk through' her part,
feeling a pleasure in thus insulting the house. One scrap of dialogue
she had with Grace, and her eyes answered with a flash of hatred to the
arrogance of the other's regard. At another point she all but missed
her cue, for her thoughts were busy with that letter to which she had
replied this afternoon. Mr. Peel looked at her savagely, and she met
his silent rebuke with an air of indifference. After that the manager
appeared to pay peculiar attention to her as often as they were
together before the footlights. It was not the first time that Mr. Peel
had allowed her to see that she was an object of interest to him.

There was an after-piece, but Clara was not engaged in it. When, at the
fall of the curtain on the melodrama, she went to the shabby
dressing-room which she shared with two companions, a message delivered
by the call boy bade her repair as soon as possible to the manager's
office. What might this mean? She was startled on the instant, but
speedily recovered her self-control; most likely she was to receive a
rating--let it come! Without unusual hurry, she washed, changed her
dress, and obeyed the summons.

Mr. Peel was still a young man, of tall and robust stature, sanguine,
with much sham refinement in his manner; he prided himself on the
civility with which he behaved to all who had business relations with
him, but every now and then the veneer gave an awkward crack, and, as
in his debate with Miss Walcott, the man himself was discovered to be
of coarse grain. His aspect was singular when, on Clara's entrance into
the private room, he laid down his cigarette and scrutinised her. There
was a fiery hue on his visage, and the scowl of his black eyebrows had
a peculiar ugliness.

'Miss Vale,' he began, after hesitation, 'do you consider that you
played your part this evening with the conscientiousness that may
fairly be expected of you?'

'Perhaps not,' replied the girl, averting her eyes, and resting her
hand on the table.

'And may I ask _why_ not?'

'I didn't feel in the humour. The house saw no difference.'

'Indeed? The house saw no difference? Do you mean to imply that you
always play badly?'

'I mean that the part isn't worth any attention--even if they were able
to judge.'

There was a perfection of insolence in her tone that in itself spoke
strongly for the abilities she could display if occasion offered.

'This is rather an offhand way of treating the subject, madam,' cried
Mr. Peel. 'If you disparage our audiences, I beg you to observe that it
is much the same thing as telling me that my own successes are
worthless!'

'I intended nothing of the kind.'

'Perhaps not.' He thrust his hands into his pockets, and looked down at
his boots for an instant. 'So you are discontented with your part?'

'It's only natural that I should be.'

'I presume you think yourself equal to Juliet, or perhaps Lady Macbeth?'

'I could play either a good deal better than most women do.'

The manager laughed, by no means ill-humouredly.

'I'm sorry I can't bring you out in Shakespeare just at present, Miss
Vale; but--should you think it a condescension to play Laura Denton?'

This was Miss Walcott's part, now Grace Danver's. Clara looked at him
with mistrust; her breath did not come quite naturally.

'How long would it take you, do you think,' pursued the other, 'to get
the words?'

'An hour or two; I all but know them.'

The manager took a few paces this way and that.

'We go on to Bolton to-morrow morning. Could you undertake to be
perfect for the afternoon rehearsal?'

'Yes.'

'Then I'll try you. Here's a copy you can take. I make no terms, you
understand; it's an experiment. We'll have another talk to-morrow.
Good-night.'

She left the room. Near the door stood Grace Danver and another
actress, both of whom were bidden to wait upon the manager before
leaving. Clara passed under the fire of their eyes, but scarcely
observed them.

Rain drenched her between the theatre and her lodgings, for she did not
think of putting up an umbrella; she thought indeed of nothing; there
was fire and tumult in her brain. On the round table in her
sitting-room supper was made ready, but she did not heed it. Excitement
compelled her to walk incessantly round and round the scanty space of
floor. Already she had begun to rehearse the chief scenes of Laura
Denton; she spoke the words with all appropriate loudness and emphasis;
her gestures were those of the stage, as though an audience sat before
her; she seemed to have grown taller. There came a double knock at the
house-door, but it did not attract her attention; a knock at her own
room, and only when some one entered was she recalled to the present.
It was Grace again; her lodging was elsewhere, and this late visit
could have but one motive.

They stood face to face. The elder woman was so incensed that her lips
moved fruitlessly, like those of a paralytic.

'I suppose you're going to make a scene,' Clara addressed her. 'Please
remember how late it is, and don't let all the house hear you.'

'You mean to tell me you accepted that offer of Peel's--without saying
a word--without as much as telling him that he ought to speak to me
first?'

'Certainly I did. I've waited long enough; I'm not going to beat about
the bush when my chance comes.'

'And you called yourself my friend?'

'I'm nobody's friend but my own in an affair of this kind. If you'd
been in my place you'd have done just the same.'

'I wouldn't! I _couldn't_ have been such a mean creature! Every man and
woman in the company'll cry shame on you.'

'Don't deafen me with your nonsense! If you played the part badly, I
suppose some one else must take it. You were only on trial, like I
shall be.'

Grace was livid with fury.

'Played badly! As if we didn't all know how you've managed it! Much it
has to do with good or bad acting! We know how creatures of your kind
get what they want.'

