What was the result? Shooter's Gardens, convinced of the fraud
practised upon them, nobly brought back their quarts of soup to the
kitchen, and with proud independence of language demanded to have their
money returned. On being met with a refusal, they--what think
you?--emptied the soup on to the floor, and went away with heads
exalted.

Vast was the indignation of Miss Lant and the other ladies. 'This is
their gratitude!' Now if you or I had been there, what an opportunity
for easing our minds! 'Gratitude, mesdames? You have entered upon this
work with expectation of gratitude?--And can you not perceive that
these people of Shooter's Gardens are poor, besotted, disease-struck
creatures, of whom--in the mass--scarcely a human quality is to be
expected? Have you still to learn what this nether world has been made
by those who belong to the sphere above it?--Gratitude, quotha?--Nay,
do _you_ be grateful that these hapless, half-starved women do not turn
and rend you. At present they satisfy themselves with insolence. Take
it silently, you who at all events hold some count of their dire state;
and endeavour to feed them without arousing their animosity!'

Well, the kitchen threatened to be a failure. It turned out that the
cheaper peas were, in fact, of inferior quality, and the ladies
hastened to go back to the dealer in Clerkenwell. This was something,
but now came a new trouble; the complaint with which Mr. and Mrs.
Batterby had known so well how to deal revived in view of the
concessions made by the new managers. Shooter's Gardens would have no
more peas; let some other vegetable be used. Again the point was
conceded; a trial was made of barley soup. Shooter's Gardens came,
looked, smelt, and shook their heads. 'It don't look nice,' was their
comment; they would none of it.

For two or three weeks, just at this crisis in the kitchen's fate, Jane
Snowdon attended with Miss Lant to help in the dispensing of the
decoction. Jane was made very nervous by the disturbances that went on,
but she was able to review the matter at issue in a far more fruitful
way than Miss Lant and the other ladies. Her opinion was not asked,
however. In the homely grey dress, with her modest, retiring manner,
her gentle, diffident countenance, she was taken by the customers for a
paid servant, and if ever it happened that she could not supply a can
of soup quickly enough sharp words reached her ear. 'Now then, you
gyurl there! Are you goin' to keep me all d'y? I've got somethink else
to do but stand 'ere.' And Jane, by her timid hastening, confirmed the
original impression, with the result that she was treated yet more
unceremoniously next time. Of all forms of insolence there is none more
flagrant than that of the degraded poor receiving charity which they
have come to regard as a right.

Jane did speak at length. Miss Lant had called to see her in Hanover
Street; seated quietly in her own parlour, with Michael Snowdon to
approve--with him she had already discussed the matter--Jane ventured
softly to compare the present state of things and that of former
winters, as described to her by various people.

'Wasn't it rather a pity,' she suggested, 'that the old people were
sent away?'

'You think so?' returned Miss Lant, with the air of one to whom a novel
thought is presented. 'You really think so, Miss Snowdon?'

'They got on so well with everybody,' Jane continued. 'And don't you
think it's better, Miss Lant, for everybody to feel satisfied?'

'But really, Mr. Batterby used to speak so very harshly. He destroyed
their self-respect.'

'I don't think they minded it,' said Jane, with simple good faith. 'And
I'm always hearing them wish he was back, instead of the new managers.'

'I think we shall have to consider this,' remarked the lady,
thoughtfully.

Considered it was, and with the result that the Batterbys before long
found themselves in their old position, uproariously welcomed by
Shooter's Gardens. In a few weeks the soup was once more concocted of
familiar ingredients, and customers, as often as they grumbled, had the
pleasure of being rebuked in their native tongue.

It was with anything but a cheerful heart that Jane went through this
initiation into the philanthropic life. Her brief period of joy and
confidence was followed by a return of anxiety, which no resolve could
suppress. It was not only that the ideals to which she strove to form
herself made no genuine appeal to her nature; the imperative hunger of
her heart remained unsatisfied. At first, when the assurance received
from Michael began to lose a little of its sustaining force, she could
say to herself, 'Patience, patience; be faithful, be trustful, and your
reward will soon come.' Nor would patience have failed her had but the
current of life flowed on in the old way. It was the introduction of
new and disturbing things that proved so great a test of fortitude.
Those two successive absences of Sidney on the appointed evening were
strangely unlike him, but perhaps could be explained by the
unsettlement of his removal; his manner when at length he did come
proved that the change in himself was still proceeding. Moreover, the
change affected Michael, who manifested increase of mental trouble at
the same time that he yielded more and more to physical infirmity.

The letter which Sidney wrote after receiving Joseph Snowdon's
confidential communications was despatched two days later. He expressed
himself in carefully chosen words, but the purport of the letter was to
make known that he no longer thought of Jane save as a friend; that the
change in her position had compelled him to take another view of his
relations to her than that he had confided to Michael at Danbury. Most
fortunately--he added--no utterance of his feelings had ever escaped
him to Jane herself, and henceforth he should be still more careful to
avoid any suggestion of more than brotherly interest. In very deed
nothing was altered; he was still her steadfast friend, and would
always aid her to his utmost in the work of her life.

That Sidney could send this letter, after keeping it in reserve for a
couple of days, proved how profoundly his instincts were revolted by
the difficulties and the ambiguity of his position. It had been bad
enough when only his own conscience was in play; the dialogue with
Joseph, following upon Bessie Byass's indiscretion, threw him wholly
off his balance, and he could give no weight to any consideration but
the necessity of recovering self-respect. Even the sophistry of that
repeated statement that he had never approached Jane as a lover did not
trouble him in face of the injury to his pride. Every word of Joseph
Snowdon's transparently artful hints was a sting to his sensitiveness;
the sum excited him to loathing. It was as though the corner of a
curtain had been raised, giving him a glimpse of all the vile greed,
the base machination, hovering about this fortune that Jane was to
inherit. Of Scawthorne he knew nothing, but his recollection of the
Peckovers was vivid enough to suggest what part Mrs. Joseph Snowdon was
playing in the present intrigues, and he felt convinced that in the
background were other beasts of prey, watching with keen, envious eyes.
The sudden revelation was a shock from which he would not soon recover;
he seemed to himself to be in a degree contaminated; he questioned his
most secret thoughts again and again, recognizing with torment the
fears which had already bidden him draw back; he desired to purify
himself by some unmistakable action.

That which happened he had anticipated. On receipt of the letter
Michael came to see him; he found the old man waiting in front of the
house when he returned to Red Lion Street after his work. The
conversation that followed was a severe test of Sidney's resolve. Had
Michael disclosed the fact of his private understanding with Jane,
Sidney would probably have yielded; but the old man gave no hint of
what he had done--partly because he found it difficult to make the
admission, partly in consequence of an indecision in his own mind with
regard to the very point at issue. Though agitated by the consciousness
of suffering in store for Jane, his thoughts disturbed by the
derangement of a part of his plan, he did not feel that Sidney's change
of mind gravely affected the plan itself. Age had cooled his blood;
enthusiasm had made personal interests of comparatively small account
to him; he recognised his granddaughter's feeling, but could not
appreciate its intensity, its surpreme significance. When Kirkwood made
a show of explaining himself, saying that he shrank from that form of
responsibility, that such a marriage suggested to him many and
insuperable embarrassments, Michael began to reflect that perchance
this was the just view. With household and family cares, could Jane
devote herself to the great work after the manner of his ideal? Had he
not been tempted by his friendship for Sidney to introduce into his
scheme what was really an incompatible element? Was it not decidedly,
infinitely better that Jane should be unmarried?

Michael had taken the last step in that process of dehumanisation which
threatens idealists of his type. He had reached at length the pass of
those frenzied votaries of a supernatural creed who exact from their
disciples the sacrifice of every human piety. Returning home, he
murmured to himself again and again, 'She must not marry. She must
overcome this desire of a happiness such as ordinary women may enjoy.
For my sake, and for the sake of her suffering fellow-creatures, Jane
must win this victory over herself.'

He purposed speaking to her, but put it off from day to day. Sidney
paid his visits as usual, and tried desperately to behave as though he
had no trouble. Could he have divined why it was that Michael had ended
by accepting his vague pretences with apparent calm, indignation,
wrath, would have possessed him; he believed, however, that the old man
out of kindness subdued what he really felt. Sidney's state was
pitiable. He knew not whether he more shrank from the thought of being
infected with Joseph Snowdon's baseness or despised himself for his
attitude to Jane. Despicable entirely had been his explanations to
Michael, but how could he make them more sincere? To tell the whole
truth, to reveal Joseph's tactics would be equivalent to taking a part
in the dirty contest; Michael would probably do him justice, but who
could say how far Joseph's machinations were becoming effectual? The
slightest tinct of uncertainty in the old man's thought, and he,
Kirkwood, became a plotter, like the others, meeting mine with
countermine.

'There will be no possibility of perfect faith between men until there
is no such thing as money! H'm, and when is that likely to come to
pass?'

Thus he epigrammatised to himself one evening, savagely enough, as with
head bent forward he plodded to Red Lion Street. Some one addressed
him; he looked up and saw Jane. Seemingly it was a chance meeting, but
she put a question at once almost as though she had been waiting for
him. 'Have you seen Pennyloaf lately, Mr. Kirkwood?'

Pennyloaf? The name suggested Bob Hewett, who again suggested John
Hewett, and so Sidney fell upon thoughts of some one who two days ago
had found a refuge in John's home. To Michael he had said nothing of
what he knew concerning Clara; a fresh occasion of uneasy thought. Bob
Hewett--so John said--had no knowledge of his sister's situation,
otherwise Pennyloaf might have come to know about it, and in that case,
perchance, Jane herself. Why not? Into what a wretched muddle of
concealments and inconsistencies and insincerities had he fallen!

'It's far too long since I saw her,' he replied, in that softened tone
which he found it impossible to avoid when his eyes met Jane's.

She was on her way home from the soup-kitchen, where certain
occupations had kept her much later than usual; this, however, was far
out of her way, and Sidney remarked on the fact, perversely, when she
had offered this explanation of her meeting him, Jane did not reply.
They walked on together, towards Islington.

'Are you going to help at that place all the winter?' he inquired.

'Yes; I think so.'

If he had spoken his thought, he would have railed against the
soup-kitchen and all that was connected with it. So far had he got in
his revolt against circumstances; Jane's 'mission' was hateful to him;
he could not bear to think of her handing soup over a counter to ragged
wretches.

'You're nothing like as cheerful as you used to be, he said, suddenly,
and all but roughly. 'Why is it?'

What a question! Jane reddened as she tried to look at him with a
smile; no words would come to her tongue.

'Do you go anywhere else, besides to--to that place?'

Not often. She had accompanied Miss Lant on a visit to some people in
Shooter's Gardens.

Sidney bent his brows. A nice spot, Shooter's Gardens.

'The houses are going to be pulled down, I'm glad to say,' continued
Jane. 'Miss Lant thinks it'll be a good opportunity for helping a few
of the families into better lodgings. We're going to buy furniture for
them--so many have as good as none at all, you know. It'll be a good
start for them, won't it?'

Sidney nodded. He was thinking of another family who already owed their
furniture to Jane's beneficence, though they did not know it.

'Mind you don't throw away kindness on worthless people,' he said
presently.

'We can only do our best, and hope they'll keep comfortable for their
own sakes.'

'Yes, yes. Well, I'll say good-night to you here. Go home and rest; you
look tired.'

He no longer called her by her name. Tearing himself away, with a last
look, he raged inwardly that so sweet and gentle a creature should be
condemned to such a waste of her young life.

Jane had obtained what she came for. At times the longing to see him
grew insupportable, and this evening she had yielded to it, going out
of her way in the hope of encountering him as he came from work. He
spoke very strangely. What did it all mean, and when would this winter
of suspense give sign of vanishing before sunlight?




CHAPTER XXIX

PHANTOMS

Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Snowdon were now established in rooms in Burton
Crescent, which is not far from King's Cross. Joseph had urged that
Clerkenwell Close was scarcely a suitable quarter for a man of his
standing, and, though with difficulty, he had achieved thus much
deliverance. Of Clem he could not get rid--just yet; but it was
something to escape Mrs. Peckover's superintendence. Clem herself
favoured the removal, naturally for private reasons. Thus far working
in alliance with her shrewd mother, she was now forming independent
projects. Mrs. Peckover's zeal was assuredly not disinterested, and
why, Clem mused with herself, should the fruits of strategy be shared?
Her husband's father could not, she saw every reason to believe, be
much longer for this world. How his property was to be divided she had
no means of discovering; Joseph professed to have no accurate
information, but as a matter of course he was deceiving her. Should he
inherit a considerable sum, it was more than probable he would think of
again quitting his native land--and without encumbrances. That movement
must somehow be guarded against; how, it was difficult as yet to
determine. In the next place, Jane was sure to take a large share of
the fortune. To that Clem strongly objected, both on abstract grounds
and because she regarded Jane with a savage hatred--a hatred which had
its roots in the time of Jane's childhood, and which had grown in
proportion as the girl reaped happiness from life. The necessity of
cloaking this sentiment had not, you may be sure, tended to mitigate
it. Joseph said that there was no longer any fear of a speedy marriage
between Jane and Kirkwood, but that such a marriage would come off some
day,--if not prevented--Clem held to be a matter of certainty. Sidney
Kirkwood was a wide-awake young man; of course he had his satisfactory
reasons for delay. Now Clem's hatred of Sidney was, from of old, only
less than that wherewith she regarded Jane. To frustrate the hopes of
that couple would be a gratification worth a good deal of risk.

She heard nothing of what had befallen Clara Hewett until the latter's
return home, and then not from her husband. Joseph and Scawthorne,
foiled by that event in an ingenious scheme which you have doubtless
understood (they little knowing how easily the severance between Jane
and Kirkwood might be effected), agreed that it was well to get Clara
restored to her father's household--for, though it seemed unlikely, it
was not impossible that she might in one way or another aid their
schemes--and on that account the anonymous letter was despatched which
informed John Hewett of his daughter's position. Between John and
Snowdon, now that they stood in the relations of master and servant,
there was naturally no longer familiar intercourse, and, in begging
leave of absence for his journey northwards, Hewett only said that a
near relative had met with a bad accident. But it would be easy, Joseph
decided, to win the man's confidence again, and thus be apprised of all
that went on. With Clem he kept silence on the subject; not improbably
she would learn sooner or later what had happened, and indeed, as
things now stood, it did not matter much; but on principle he excluded
her as much as possible from his confidence. He knew she hated him, and
he was not backward in returning the sentiment, though constantly
affecting a cheerful friendliness in his manner to her; after all,
their union was but temporary. In Hanover Street he was also silent
regarding the Hewetts, for there his role was that of a good,
simple-minded fellow, incapable of intrigue, living for the domestic
affections. If Kirkwood chose to speak to Michael or Jane of the
matter, well, one way or another, that would advance things a stage,
and there was nothing for it but to watch the progress.

Alone all through the day, and very often in the evening Clem was not
at all disposed to occupy herself in domestic activity. The lodgings
were taken furnished, and a bondmaid of the house did such work as was
indispensable. Dirt and disorder were matters of indifference to the
pair, who represented therein the large class occupying cheap London
lodgings; an impure atmosphere, surroundings more or less squalid,
constant bickering with the landlady, coarse usage of the
servant--these things Clem understood as necessaries of independent
life, and it would have cost her much discomfort had she been required
to live in a more civilised manner. Her ambitions were essentially
gross. In the way of social advancement she appreciated nothing but an
increased power of spending money, and consequently of asserting
herself over others. She had no desire whatever to enter a higher class
than that in which she was born; to be of importance in her familiar
circle was the most she aimed at. In visiting the theatre, she did not
so much care to occupy a superior place--indeed, such a position made
her ill at ease--as to astonish her neighbours in the pit by a lavish
style of costume, by loud remarks implying a free command of cash, by
purchase between the acts of something expensive to eat or drink.
Needless to say that she never read anything but police news; in the
fiction of her world she found no charm, so sluggishly unimaginative
was her nature. Till of late she had either abandoned herself all day
long to a brutal indolence, eating rather too much, and finding quite
sufficient occupation for her slow brain in the thought of how pleasant
it was not to be obliged to work, and occasionally in reviewing the
chances that she might eventually have plenty of money and no Joseph
Snowdon as a restraint upon her; or else, her physical robustness
demanding exercise, she walked considerable distances about the
localities she knew, calling now and then upon an acquaintance.

Till of late; but a change had come upon her life. It was now seldom
that she kept the house all day; when within doors she was restless,
quarrelsome. Joseph became aware with surprise that she no longer tried
to conceal her enmity against him; on a slight provocation she broke
into a fierceness which reminded him of the day when he undeceived her
as to his position, and her look at such times was murderous. It might
come, he imagined, of her being released from the prudent control of
her mother. However, again a few weeks and things were somewhat
improved; she eyed him like a wild beast, but was less frequent in her
outbreaks. Here, too, it might be that Mrs. Peckover's influence was at
work, for Clara spent at least four evenings of the seven away from
home, and always said she had been at the Close. As indifferent as it
was possible to be, Joseph made no attempt to restrain her
independence; indeed he was glad to have her out of his way.

We must follow her on one of these evenings ostensibly passed at Mrs.
Peckover's--no, not follow, but discover her at nine o'clock.

In Old Street, not far from Shoreditch Station, was a shabby little
place of refreshment, kept by an Italian; pastry and sweet-stuff filled
the window; at the back of the shop, through a doorway on each side of
which was looped a pink curtain, a room, furnished with three
marble-topped tables, invited those who wished to eat and drink more at
ease than was possible before the counter. Except on Sunday evening
this room was very little used, and there, on the occasion of which I
speak, Clem was sitting with Bob Hewett. They had been having supper
together--French pastry and a cup of cocoa.

She leaned forward on her elbows, and said imperatively, 'Tell
Pennyloaf to make it up with her again.'

'Why?'

'Because I want to know what goes on in Hanover Street. You was a fool
to send her away, and you'd ought to have told me about it before now.
If they was such friends, I suppose the girl told her lots o' things.
But I expect they see each other just the same. You don't suppose she
does all _you_ tell her?'

'I'll bet you what you like she does!' cried Bob.

Clem glared at him.

'Oh, you an' your Pennyloaf! Likely she tells you the truth. You're so
fond of each other, ain't you! Tells you everything, does she?--and the
way you treat her!'

'Who's always at me to make me treat her worse still?' Bob retorted
half angrily, half in expostulation.

'Well, and so I am, 'cause I hate the name of her! I'd like to hear as
you starve her and her brats half to death. How much money did you give
her last week? Now you just tell me the truth. How much was it?'

'How can I remember? Three or four bob, I s'pose.'

'Three or four bob!' she repeated, snarling. 'Give her one, and make
her live all the week on it. Wear her down! Make her pawn all she has,
and go cold!'

Her cheeks were on fire; her eyes started in the fury of jealousy; she
set her teeth together.

'I'd better do for her altogether,' said Bob, with an evil grin.

Clem looked at him, without speaking; kept her gaze on him; then she
said in a thick voice:

'There's many a true word said in joke.'

Bob moved uncomfortably. There was a brief silence, then the other,
putting her face nearer his:

'Not just yet. I want to use her to get all I can about that girl and
her old beast of a grandfather. Mind you do as I tell you. Pennyloaf's
to have her back again, and she's to make her talk, and you're to get
all you can from Pennyloaf--understand?'

There came noises from the shop. Three work-girls had just entered and
were buying cakes, which they began to eat at the counter. They were
loud in gossip and laughter, and their voices rang like brass against
brass. Clem amused herself in listening to them for a few minutes; then
she became absent, moving a finger round and round on her plate. A
disagreeable flush still lingered under her eyes.

'Have you told her about Clara?'

'Told who?'

'Who? Pennyloaf, of course.'

'No, I haven't. Why should I?'

'Oh, you're such a affectionate couple! See, you're only to give her
two shillin's next week. Let her go hungry this nice weather.'

'She won't do that if Jane Snowdon comes back, so there you're out of
it!'

Clem bit her lip.

'What's the odds? Make it up with a hit in the mouth now and then.'

'What do you expect to know from that girl?' inquired Bob.

'Lots o' things. I want to know what the old bloke's goin' to do with
his money, don't I? And I want to know what my beast of a 'usband's got
out of him. And I want to know what that feller Kirkwood's goin' to do.
He'd ought to marry your sister by rights.'

'Not much fear of that now.'

'Trust him! He'll stick where there's money. See, Bob; if that Jane was
to kick the bucket, do you think the old bloke 'ud leave it all to Jo?'

'How can I tell?'

'Well, look here. Supposin' he died an' left most to her; an' then
supposin' _she_ was to go off; would Jo have all her tin?'

'Course he would.'

Clem mused, eating her lower lip.

'But supposin' Jo was to go off first, after the old bloke? Should I
have all he left?'

'I think so, but I'm not sure.'

'You think so? And then should I have all _hers_? If she had a
accident, you know.'

'I suppose you would. But then that's only if they didn't make wills,
and leave it away from you.'

Clem started. Intent as she had been for a long time on the
possibilities hinted at, the thought of unfavourable disposition by
will had never occurred to her. She shook it away.

'Why should they make wills? They ain't old enough for that, neither of
them.'

'And you might as well say they ain't old enough to be likely to take
their hook, either,' suggested Bob, with a certain uneasiness in his
tone.

Clem looked about her, as if her fierce eyes sought something. Her
brows twitched a little. She glanced at Bob, but he did not meet her
look. 'I don't care so much about the money,' she said, in a lower and
altered voice. 'I'd be content with a bit of it, if only I could get
rid of him at the same time.'

Bob looked gloomy.

'Well, it's no use talking,' he muttered.

'It's all your fault.'

'How do you make that out? It was you quarrelled first.'

'You're a liar!'

'Oh, there's no talking to you!'

He shuffled with his feet, then rose.

'Where can I see you on Wednesday morning?' asked Clem. 'I want to hear
about that girl.'

'It can't be Wednesday morning. I tell you I shall be getting the sack
next thing; they've promised it. Two days last week I wasn't at the
shop, and one day this. It can't go on.'

His companion retorted angrily, and for five minutes they stood in
embittered colloquy. It ended in Bob's turning away and going out into
the street. Clem followed, and they walked westwards in silence.
Reaching City Road, and crossing to the corner where lowers St. Luke's
Hospital--grim abode of the insane, here in the midst of London's
squalor and uproar--they halted to take leave. The last words they
exchanged, after making an appointment, were of brutal violence.

This was two days after Clara Hewett's arrival in London, and the same
fog still hung about the streets, allowing little to be seen save the
blurred glimmer of gas. Bob sauntered through it, his hands in his
pockets, observant of nothing; now and then a word escaped his lips,
generally an oath. Out of Old Street he turned into Whitecross Street,
whence by black and all but deserted ways--Barbican and Long Lane--he
emerged into West Smithfield. An alley in the shadow of Bartholomew's
Hospital brought him to a certain house: just as he was about to knock
at the door it opened, and Jack Bartley appeared on the threshold. They
exchanged a 'Hello!' of surprise, and after a whispered word or two on
the pavement, went in. They mounted the stairs to a bedroom which Jack
occupied. When the door was closed:

'Bill's got copped! 'whispered Bartley.

'Copped? Any of it on him?'

'Only the half-crown as he was pitchin', thank God! They let him go
again after he'd been to the station. It was a conductor, I'd never try
them blokes myself; they're too downy.'

'Let's have a look at 'em,' said Bob, after musing. 'I thought myself
as they wasn't quite the reg'lar.'

As he spoke he softly turned the key in the door. Jack then put his arm
up the chimney and brought down a small tin box, soot-blackened; he
opened it, and showed about a dozen pieces of money--in appearance
half-crowns and florins. One of the commonest of offences against the
law in London, this to which our young friends were not unsuccessfully
directing their attention; one of the easiest to commit, moreover, for
a man with Bob's craft at his finger-ends. A mere question of a mould
and a pewter-pot, if one be content with the simpler branches of the
industry. 'The snyde' or 'the queer' is the technical name by which
such products are known. Distribution is, of course, the main
difficulty; it necessitates mutual trust between various confederates.
Bob Hewett still kept to his daily work, but gradually he was being
drawn into alliance with an increasing number of men who scorned the
yoke of a recognised occupation. His face, his clothing, his speech,
all told whither he was tending, had one but the experience necessary
for the noting of such points. Bob did not find his life particularly
pleasant; he was in perpetual fear; many a time he said to himself that
he would turn back. Impossible to do so; for a thousand reasons
impossible; yet he still believed that the choice lay with him.

His colloquy with Jack only lasted a few minutes, then he walked
homewards, crossing the Metropolitan Meat-market, going up St. John's
Lane, beneath St. John's Arch, thence to Rosoman Street and Merlin
Place, where at present he lived. All the way he pondered Clem's words.
Already their import had become familiar enough to lose that first
terribleness. Of course he should never take up the proposal seriously;
no, no, that was going a bit too far; but suppose Clem's husband were
really contriving this plot on his own account? Likely, very likely;
but he'd be a clever fellow if he managed such a thing in a way that
did not immediately subject him to suspicion. How could it be done? No
harm in thinking over an affair of that kind when you have no intention
of being drawn into it yourself. There was that man at Peckham who
poisoned his sister not long ago; he was a fool to get found out in the
way he did; he might have--

The room in which he found Pennyloaf sitting was so full of fog that
the lamp seemed very dim; the fire had all but died out. One of the
children lay asleep; the other Pennyloaf was nursing, for it had a bad
cough and looked much like a wax doll that has gone through a great
deal of ill-usage. A few more weeks and Pennyloaf would be again a
mother; she felt very miserable as often as she thought of it, and Bob
had several times spoken with harsh impatience on the subject.

At present he was in no mood for conversation; to Pennyloaf's remarks
and questions he gave not the slightest heed, but in a few minutes
tumbled himself into bed.

'Get that light put out,' he exclaimed, after lying still for a while.

Pennyloaf said she was uneasy about the child; its cough seemed to be
better, but it moved about restlessly and showed no sign of getting to
sleep.

'Give it some of the mixture, then. Be sharp and put the light out.'

Pennyloaf obeyed the second injunction, and she too lay down, keeping
the child in her arms; of the 'mixture' she was afraid, for a few days
since the child of a neighbour had died in consequence of an overdose
of this same anodyne. For a long time there was silence in the room.
Outside, voices kept sounding with that peculiar muffled distinctness
which they have on a night of dense fog, when there is little or no
wheel-traffic to make the wonted rumbling.

'Are y'asleep?' Bob asked suddenly.

'No.'

'There's something I wanted to tell you. You can have Jane Snowdon here
again, if you like.'

'I can? Really?'

'You may as well make use of her. That'll do; shut up and go to sleep.'

In the morning Pennyloaf was obliged to ask for money; she wished to
take the child to the hospital again, and as the weather was very bad
she would have to pay an omnibus fare. Bob growled at the demand, as
was nowadays his custom. Since he had found a way of keeping his own
pocket tolerably well supplied from time to time, he was becoming so
penurious at home that Pennyloaf had to beg for what she needed copper
by copper. Excepting breakfast, he seldom took a meal with her. The
easy good-nature which in the beginning made him an indulgent husband
had turned in other directions since his marriage was grown a weariness
to him. He did not, in truth, spend much upon himself, but in his
leisure time was always surrounded by companions whom he had a pleasure
in treating with the generosity of the public-house. A word of flattery
was always sure of payment if Bob had a coin in his pocket. Ever hungry
for admiration, for prominence, he found new opportunities of
gratifying his taste now that he had a resource when his wages ran out.
So far from becoming freer-handed again with his wife and children, he
grudged every coin that he was obliged to expend on them. Pennyloaf's
submissiveness encouraged him in this habit; where other wives would
have 'made a row,' she yielded at once to his grumbling and made shift
with the paltriest allowance. You should have seen the kind of diet on
which she habitually lived. Like all the women of her class, utterly
ignorant and helpless in the matter of preparing food, she abandoned
the attempt to cook anything, and expended her few pence daily on
whatever happened to tempt her in a shop, when meal-time came round. In
the present state of her health she often suffered from a morbid
appetite and fed on things of incredible unwholesomeness. Thus, there
was a kind of cake exposed in a window in Rosoman Street, two layers of
pastry with half an inch of something like very coarse mincemeat
between; it cost a halfpenny a square, and not seldom she ate four, or
even six, of these squares, as heavy as lead, making this her dinner. A
cookshop within her range exhibited at midday great dough-puddings,
kept hot by jets of steam that came up through the zinc on which they
lay; this food was cheap and satisfying, and Pennyloaf often regaled
both herself and the children on thick slabs of it. Pease-pudding also
attracted her; she fetched it from the pork-butcher's in a little
basin, which enabled her to bring away at the same time a spoonful or
two of gravy from the joints of which she was not rich enough to
purchase a cut. Her drink was tea; she had the pot on the table all
day, and kept adding hot water. Treacle she purchased now and then, but
only as a treat when her dinner had cost even less than usual; she did
not venture to buy more than a couple of ounces at a time, knowing by
experience that she could not resist this form of temptation, and must
eat and eat till all was finished.

Bob flung sixpence on the table. He was ashamed of himself--you will
not understand him if you fail to recognise that--but the shame only
served to make him fret under his bondage. Was he going to be tied to
Pennyloaf all his life, with a family constantly increasing?
Practically he had already made a resolve to be free before very long;
the way was not quite clear to him as yet. But he went to work still
brooding over Clem's words of the night before.

Pennyloaf let the fire go out, locked the elder child into the room for
safety against accidents, and set forth for the hospital. It rained
heavily, and the wind rendered her umbrella useless. She had to stand
for a long time at a street-corner before the omnibus came; the water
soaked into her leaky shoes, but that didn't matter; it was the child
on whose account she was anxious. Having reached her destination, she
sat for a long time waiting her turn among the numerous out-patients.
Just as the opportunity for passing into the doctor's room arrived, a
movement in the bundle she held made her look closely at the child's
face; at that instant it had ceased to live.

The medical man behaved kindly to her, but she gave way to no outburst
of grief; with tearless eyes she stared at the unmoving body in a sort
of astonishment. The questions addressed to her she could not answer
with any intelligence; several times she asked stupidly, 'Is she really
dead?' There was nothing to wonder at, however; the doctor glanced at
the paper on which he had written prescriptions twice or thrice during
the past few weeks, and found the event natural enough. . . .

Towards the close of the afternoon Pennyloaf was in Hanover Street. She
wished to see Jane Snowdon, but had a fear of going up to the door and
knocking. Jane might not be at home, and, if she were, Pennyloaf did
not know in what words to explain her coming and say what had happened.
She was in a dazed, heavy, tongue-tied state; indeed she did not
clearly remember how she had come thus far, or what she had done since
leaving the hospital at midday. However, her steps drew nearer to the
house, and at last she had raised the knocker--just raised it and let
it fall.

Mrs. Byass opened; she did not know Pennyloaf by sight. The latter
tried to say something, but only stammered a meaningless sound;
thereupon Bessie concluded she was a beggar, and with a shake of the
head shut the door upon her.

Pennyloaf turned away in confusion and dull misery. She walked to the
end of the street and stood there. On leaving home she had forgotten
her umbrella, and now it was raining heavily again. Of a sudden her
need became powerful enough to overcome all obstacles; she knew that
she _must_ see Jane Snowdon, that she could not go home till she had
done so. Jane was the only friend she had; the only creature who would
speak the kind of words to her for which she longed.

Again the knocker fell, and again Mrs. Byass appeared.

'What do you want? I've got nothing for you,' she cried impatiently.

'I want to see Miss Snowdon, please, mum--Miss Snowdon, please--'

'Miss Snowdon? Then why didn't you say so? Step inside.'

A few moments and Jane came running downstairs.

'Pennyloaf!'

Ah! that was the voice that did good. How it comforted and blessed,
after the hospital, and the miserable room in which the dead child was
left lying, and the rainy street!




CHAPTER XXX

ON A BARREN SHORE

About this time Mr. Scawthorne received one morning a letter which,
though not unexpected, caused him some annoyance, and even anxiety. It
was signed 'C. V.,' and made brief request for an interview on the
evening of the next day at Waterloo Station.

The room in which our friend sat at breakfast was of such very modest
appearance that it seemed to argue but poor remuneration for the
services rendered by him in the office of Messrs. Percival & Peel. It
was a parlour on the second floor of a lodging-house in Chelsea;
Scawthorne's graceful person and professional bearing were out of place
amid the trivial appointments. He lived here for the simple reason that
in order to enjoy a few of the luxuries of civilisation he had to spend
as little as possible on bare necessaries. His habits away from home
were those of a man to whom a few pounds are no serious consideration;
his pleasant dinner at the restaurant, his occasional stall at a
theatre, his easy acquaintance with easy livers of various kinds, had
become indispensable to him, and as a matter of course his expenditure
increased although his income kept at the same figure. That figure was
not contemptible, regard had to the path by which he had come thus far;
Mr. Percival esteemed his abilities highly, and behaved to him with
generosity. Ten years ago Scawthorne would have lost his senses with
joy at the prospect of such a salary; to-day he found it miserably
insufficient to the demands he made upon life. Paltry debts harassed
him; inabilities fretted his temperament and his pride; it irked him to
have no better abode than this musty corner to which he could never
invite an acquaintance. And then, notwithstanding his mental
endowments, his keen social sense, his native tact, in all London not
one refined home was open to him, not one domestic circle of educated
people could he approach and find a welcome.

Scawthorne was passing out of the stage when a man seeks only the
gratification of his propensities; he began to focus his outlook upon
the world, and to feel the significance of maturity. The double
existence he was compelled to lead--that of a laborious and
clear-brained man of business in office hours, that of a hungry rascal
in the time which was his own--not only impressed him with a sense of
danger, but made him profoundly dissatisfied with the unreality of what
he called his enjoyments. What, he asked himself, had condemned him to
this kind of career? Simply the weight under which he started, his poor
origin, his miserable youth. However carefully regulated his private
life had been, his position to-day could not have been other than it
was; no degree of purity would have opened to him the door of a
civilised house. Suppose he had wished to marry; where, pray, was he to
find his wife? A barmaid? Why, yes, other men of his standing wedded
barmaids and girls from the houses of business, and so on; but they had
neither his tastes nor his brains. Never had it been his lot to
exchange a word with an educated woman--save in the office on rare
occasions. There is such a thing as self-martyrdom in the cause of
personal integrity; another man might have said to himself, 'Providence
forbids me the gratification of my higher instincts, and I must be
content to live a life of barrenness, that I may at least be above
reproach.' True, but Scawthorne happened not to be so made. He was of
the rebels of the earth. Formerly he revolted because he could not
indulge his senses to their full; at present his ideal was changed, and
the past burdened him.

Yesterday he had had an interview with old Mr. Percival which, for the
first time in his life, opened to him a prospect of the only kind of
advancement conformable with his higher needs. The firm of Percival &
Peel was, in truth, Percival & Son, Mr. Peel having been dead for many
years; and the son in question lacked a good deal of being the capable
lawyer whose exertions could supplement the failing energy of the
senior partner. Mr. Percival having pondered the matter for some time,
now proposed that Scawthorne should qualify himself for admission as a
solicitor (the circumstances required his being under articles for
three years only), and then, if everything were still favourable,
accept a junior partnership in the firm. Such an offer was a testimony
of the high regard in which Scawthorne was held by his employer; it
stirred him with hope he had never dared to entertain since his eyes
were opened to the realities of the world, and in a single day did more
for the ripening of his prudence than years would have effected had his
position remained unaltered. Scawthorne realised more distinctly what a
hazardous game he had been playing.

And here was this brief note, signed 'C. V.' An ugly affair to look
back upon, all that connected itself with those initials. The worst of
it was, that it could not be regarded as done with. Had he anything to
fear from 'C. V.' directly? The meeting must decide that. He felt now
what a fortunate thing it was that his elaborate plot to put an end to
the engagement between Kirkwood and Jane Snowdon had been accidentally
frustrated--a plot which _might_ have availed himself nothing, even had
it succeeded. But was he, in his abandonment of rascality in general,
to think no more of the fortune which had so long kept his imagination
uneasy? Had he not, rather, a vastly better chance of getting some of
that money into his own pocket? It really seemed as if Kirkwood--though
he might be only artful--had relinquished his claim on the girl, at all
events for the present; possibly he was an honest man, which would
explain his behaviour. Michael Snowdon could not live much longer; Jane
would be the ward of the Percivals, and certainly would be aided to a
position more correspondent with her wealth. Why should it then be
impossible for _him_ to become Jane's husband? Joseph, beyond a doubt,
could be brought to favour that arrangement, by means of a private
understanding more advantageous to him than anything he could
reasonably hope from the girl's merely remaining unmarried. This change
in his relations to the Percivals would so far improve his social
claims that many of the difficulties hitherto besieging such a scheme
as this might easily be set aside. Come, come; the atmosphere was
clearing. Joseph himself, now established in a decent business, would
become less a fellow-intriguer than an ordinary friend bound to him, in
the way of the world, by mutual interests. Things must be put in order;
by some device the need of secrecy in his intercourse with Joseph must
come to an end. In fact, there remained but two hazardous points. Could
the connection between Jane and Kirkwood be brought definitely to an
end. And was anything to be feared from poor 'C. V.'?

Waterloo Station is a convenient rendezvous; its irregular form
provides many corners of retirement, out-of-the-way recesses where talk
can be carried on in something like privacy. To one of these secluded
spots Scawthorne drew aside with the veiled woman who met him at the
entrance from Waterloo Road. So closely was her face shrouded, that he
had at first a difficulty in catching the words she addressed to him.
The noise of an engine getting up steam, the rattle of cabs and
porters' barrows, the tread and voices of a multitude of people made
fitting accompaniment to a dialogue which in every word presupposed the
corruptions and miseries of a centre of modern life.

'Why did you send that letter to my father?' was Clara's first question.

'Letter? What letter?'

'Wasn't it you who let him know about me?'

'Certainly not, How should I have known his address? When I saw the
newspapers, I went down to Bolton and made inquiries. When I heard your
father had been, I concluded you had yourself sent for him. Otherwise,
I should, of course, have tried to be useful to you in some way. As it
was, I supposed you would scarcely thank me for coming forward.'

It might or might not be the truth, as far as Clara was able to decide.
Possibly the information had come from some one else. She knew him well
enough to be assured by his tone that nothing more could be elicited
from him on that point.

'You are quite recovered, I hope?' Scawthorne added, surveying her as
she stood in the obscurity. 'In your general health?'

He was courteous, somewhat distant.

'I suppose I'm as well as I shall ever be,' she answered coldly. 'I
asked you to meet me because I wanted to know what it was you spoke of
in your last letters. You got my answer, I suppose.'

'Yes, I received your answer. But--in fact, it's too late. The time has
gone by; and perhaps I was a little hasty in the hopes I held out. I
had partly deceived myself.'

'Never mind. I wish to know what it was,' she said im-patiently.

'It can't matter now. Well, there's no harm in mentioning it. Naturally
you went out of your way to suppose it was something dishonourable.
Nothing of the kind; I had an idea that you might come to terms with an
Australian who was looking out for actresses for a theatre in
Melbourne--that was all. But he wasn't quite the man I took him for. I
doubt whether it could have been made as profitable as I thought at
first.'

'You expect me to believe that story?'

'Not unless you like. It's some time since you put any faith in my
goodwill. The only reason I didn't speak plainly was because I felt
sure that the mention of a foreign country would excite your
suspicions. You have always attributed evil motives to me rather than
good. However, this is not the time to speak of such things. I
sympathise with you--deeply. Will you tell me if I can--can help you at
all?'

'No, you can't. I wanted to make quite sure that you were what I
thought you, that's all.'

'I don't think, on the whole, you have any reason to complain of
ill-faith on my part. I secured you the opportunities that are so hard
to find.'

'Yes, you did. We don't owe each other anything--that's one comfort.
I'll just say that you needn't have any fear I shall trouble you in
future; I know that's what you're chiefly thinking about.'

'You misjudge me; but that can't be helped. I wish very much it were in
my power to be of use to you.'

'Thank you.'

On that last note of irony they parted. True enough, in one sense, that
there remained debt on neither side. But Clara, for all the fierce
ambition which had brought her life to this point, could not divest
herself of a woman's instincts. That simple fact explained various
inconsistencies in her behaviour to Scawthorne since she had made
herself independent of him; it explained also why this final interview
became the bitterest charge her memory preserved against him.

Her existence for some three weeks kept so gloomy a monotony that it
was impossible she should endure it much longer. The little room which
she shared at night with Annie and Amy was her cell throughout the day.
Of necessity she had made the acquaintance of Mrs. Eagles, but they
scarcely saw more of each other than if they had lived in different
tenements on the same staircase; she had offered to undertake a share
of the housework, but her father knew that everything of the kind was
distasteful to her, and Mrs. Eagles continued to assist Amy as
hitherto. To save trouble, she came into the middle room for her meals,
at these times always keeping as much of her face as possible hidden.
The children could not overcome a repulsion, a fear, excited by her
veil and the muteness she preserved in their presence; several nights
passed before little Annie got to sleep with any comfort. Only with her
father did Clara hold converse; in the evening he always sat alone with
her for an hour. She went out perhaps every third day, after dark,
stealing silently down the long staircase, and walking rapidly until
she had escaped the neighbourhood--like John Hewett when formerly he
wandered forth in search of her. Her strength was slight; after
half-an-hour's absence she came back so wearied that the ascent of
stairs cost her much suffering.

The economy prevailing in to-day's architecture takes good care that no
depressing circumstance shall be absent from the dwellings in which the
poor find shelter. What terrible barracks, those Farringdon Road
Buildings! Vast, sheer walls, unbroken by even an attempt at ornament;
row above row of windows in the mud-coloured surface, upwards, upwards,
lifeless eyes, murky openings that tell of bareness, disorder,
comfortlessness within. One is tempted to say that Shooter's Gardens
are a preferable abode. An inner courtyard, asphalted, swept
clean--looking up to the sky as from a prison. Acres of these edifices,
the tinge of grime declaring the relative dates of their erection;
millions of tons of brute brick and mortar, crushing the spirit as you
gaze. Barracks, in truth; housing for the army of industrialism, an
army fighting with itself, rank against rank, man against man, that the
survivors may have whereon to feed. Pass by in the night, and strain
imagination to picture the weltering mass of human weariness, of
bestiality, of unmerited dolour, of hopeless hope, of crushed
surrender, tumbled together within those forbidding walls.

Clara hated the place from her first hour in it. It seemed to her that
the air was poisoned with the odour of an unclean crowd. The yells of
children at play in the courtyard tortured her nerves; the regular
sounds on the staircase, day after day repeated at the same hours,
incidents of the life of poverty, irritated her sick brain and filled
her with despair to think that as long as she lived she could never
hope to rise again above this world to which she was born. Gone for
ever, for ever, the promise that always gleamed before her whilst she
had youth and beauty and talent. With the one, she felt as though she
had been robbed of all three blessings; her twenty years were now a
meaningless figure; the energies of her mind could avail no more than
an idiot's mummery. For the author of her calamity she nourished no
memory of hatred; her resentment was against the fate which had cursed
her existence from its beginning.

For this she had dared everything, had made the supreme sacrifice.
Conscience had nothing to say to her, but she felt herself an outcast
even among these wretched toilers whose swarming aroused her disgust.
Given the success which had been all but in her grasp, and triumphant
pride would have scored out every misgiving as to the cost at which the
victory had been won. Her pride was unbroken; under the stress of
