anguish it became a scorn for goodness and humility; but in the
desolation of her future she read a punishment equal to the daring
wherewith she had aspired. Excepting her poor old father, not a living
soul that held account of her. She might live for years and years. Her
father would die, and then no smallest tribute of love or admiration
would be hers for ever. More than that; perforce she must gain her own
living, and in doing so she must expose herself to all manner of
insulting wonder and pity. Was it a life that could be lived?

Hour after hour she sat with her face buried in her hands. She did not
weep; tears were trivial before a destiny such as this. But groans and
smothered cries often broke the silence of her solitude--cries of
frenzied revolt, wordless curses. Once she rose up suddenly, passed
through the middle room, and out on to the staircase; there a gap in
the wall, guarded by iron railings breast-high, looked down upon the
courtyard. She leaned forward over the bar and measured the distance
that separated her from the ground; a ghastly height! Surely one would
not feel much after such a fall? In any case, the crashing agony of but
an instant. Had not this place tempted other people before now?

Some one coming upstairs made her shrink back into her room, She had
felt the horrible fascination of that sheer depth, and thought of it
for days, thought of it until she dreaded to quit the tenement, lest a
power distinct from will should seize and hurl her to destruction. She
knew that that must not happen here; for all her self-absorption, she
could not visit with such cruelty the one heart that loved her. And
thinking of him, she understood that her father's tenderness was not
wholly the idle thing that it had been to her at first; her love could
never equal his, had never done so in her childhood, but she grew
conscious of a soothing power in the gentle and timid devotion with
which he tended her. His appearance of an evening was something more
than a relief after the waste of hours which made her day. The rough,
passionate man made himself as quiet and sympathetic as a girl when he
took his place by her. Compared with her, his other children were as
nothing to him. Impossible that Clara should not be touched by the
sense that he who had everything to forgive, whom she had despised and
abandoned, behaved now as one whose part it is to beseech forgiveness.
She became less impatient when he tried to draw her into conversation;
when he held her thin soft hand in those rude ones of his, she knew a
solace in which there was something of gratitude.

Yet it was John who revived her misery in its worst form. Pitying her
unoccupied loneliness, he brought home one day a book that he had
purchased from a stall in Farringdon Street; it was a novel (with a
picture on the cover which seemed designed to repel any person not
wholly without taste), and might perhaps serve the end of averting her
thoughts from their one subject. Clara viewed it contemptuously, but
made a show of being thankful, and on the next day she did glance at
its pages. The story was better than its illustration; it took a hold
upon her; she read all day long. But when she returned to herself, it
was to find that she had been exasperating her heart's malady. The book
dealt with people of wealth and refinement, with the world to which she
had all her life been aspiring, and to which she might have attained.
The meanness of her surroundings became in comparison more mean, the
bitterness of her fate more bitter. You must not lose sight of the fact
that since abandoning her work-girl existence Clara had been constantly
educating herself, not only by direct study of books, but through her
association with people, her growth in experience. Where in the old
days of rebellion she had only an instinct, a divination to guide her,
there was now just enough of knowledge to give occupation to her
developed intellect and taste. Far keener was her sense of the loss she
had suffered than her former longing for what she knew only in dream.
The activity of her mind received a new impulse when she broke free
from Scawthorne and began her upward struggle in independence. Whatever
books were obtainable she read greedily; she purchased numbers of plays
in the acting-editions, and studied with the utmost earnestness such
parts as she knew by repute; no actress entertained a more superb
ambition, none was more vividly conscious of power. But it was not only
at stage-triumph that Clara aimed; glorious in itself, this was also to
serve her as a means of becoming nationalised among that race of beings
whom birth and breeding exalt above the multitude. A notable illusion;
pathetic to dwell upon. As a work-girl, she nourished envious hatred of
those the world taught her to call superiors; they were then as remote
and unknown to her as gods on Olympus. From her place behind the
footlights she surveyed the occupants of boxes and stalls in a changed
spirit; the distance was no longer insuperable; she heard of fortunate
players who mingled on equal terms with men and women of refinement.
There, she imagined, was her ultimate goal. 'It is to _them_ that I
belong! Be my origin what it may, I have the intelligence and the
desires of one born to freedom. Nothing in me, nothing, is akin to that
gross world from which I have escaped!' So she thought--with every drop
of her heart's blood crying its source from that red fountain of revolt
whereon never yet did the upper daylight gleam! Brain and pulses such
as hers belong not to the mild breed of mortals fostered in sunshine.
But for the stroke of fate, she might have won that reception which was
in her dream, and with what self-mockery when experience had matured
itself! Never yet did true rebel, who has burst the barriers of social
limitation, find aught but _ennui_ in the trim gardens beyond.

When John asked if the book had given her amusement, she said that
reading made her eyes ache. He noticed that her hand felt feverish, and
that the dark mood had fallen upon her as badly as ever to-night.

'It's just what I said,' she exclaimed with abruptness, after long
refusal to speak. 'I knew your friend would never come as long as I was
here.'

John regarded her anxiously. The phrase 'your friend' had a peculiar
sound that disturbed him. It made him aware that she had been thinking
often of Sidney Kirkwood since his name had been dismissed from their
conversation. He, too, had often turned his mind uneasily in the same
direction, wondering whether he ought to have spoken of Sidney so
freely. At the time it seemed best, indeed almost inevitable; but habit
and the force of affection were changing his view of Clara in several
respects. He recognised the impossibility of her continuing to live as
now, yet it was as difficult as ever to conceive a means of aiding her.
Unavoidably he kept glancing towards Kirkwood. He knew that Sidney was
no longer a free man; he knew that, even had it been otherwise, Clara
could be nothing to him. In spite of facts, the father kept brooding on
what might have been. His own love was perdurable; how could it other
than intensify when its object was so unhappy? His hot, illogical mood
all but brought about a revival of the old resentment against Sidney.

'I haven't seen him for a week or two,' he replied, in an embarrassed
way.

'Did he tell you he shouldn't come?'

'No. After we'd talked about it, you know--when you told me you didn't
mind--I just said a word or two; and he nodded, that was all.'

She became silent. John, racked by doubts as to whether he should say
more of Sidney or still hold his peace, sat rubbing the back of one
hand with the other and looking about the room.

'Father,' Clara resumed presently, 'what became of that child at Mrs.
Peckover's, that her grandfather came and took away? Snowdon; yes, that
was her name; Jane Snowdon.'

'You remember they went to live with somebody you used to know,' John
replied, with hesitation. 'They're still in the same house.'

'So she's grown up. Did you ever hear about that old man having a lot
of money?'

'Why, my dear, I never heard nothing but what them Peckovers talked at
the time. But there was a son of his turned up as seemed to have some
money. He married Mrs. Peckover's daughter.'

Clara expressed surprise.

'A son of his? Not the girl's father?

'Yes; her father. I don't know nothing about his history. It's for him,
or partly for him, as I'm workin' now, Clara. The firm's Lake, Snowdon
& Co.'

'Why didn't you mention it before?'

'I don't hardly know, my dear.'

She looked at him, aware that something was being kept back.

'Tell me about the girl. What does she do?'

'She goes to work, I believe; but I haven't heard much about her since
a good time. Sidney Kirkwood's a friend of her grandfather. He often
goes there, I believe.'

'What is she like?' Clara asked, after a pause. 'She used to be such a
weak, ailing thing, I never thought she'd grow up. What's she like to
look at?'

'I can't tell you, my dear. I don't know as ever I see her since those
times.'

Again a silence.

'Then it's Mr. Kirkwood that has told you what you know of her?'

'Why, no. It was chiefly Mrs. Peckover told me. She did say, Clara--but
then I can't tell whether it's true or not--she did say something about
Sidney and her.'

He spoke with difficulty, feeling constrained to make the disclosure,
but anxious as to its result. Clara made no movement, seemed to have
heard with indifference.

'It's maybe partly 'cause of that,' added John, in a low voice, 'that
he doesn't like to come here.'

'Yes; I understand.'

They spoke no more on the subject.




CHAPTER XXXI

WOMAN AND ACTRESS

In a tenement on the same staircase, two floors below, lived a family
with whom John Hewett was on friendly terms. Necessity calling these
people out of London for a few days, they had left with John the key of
their front door; a letter of some moment might arrive in their
absence, and John undertook to re-post it to them. The key was hung on
a nail in Clara's room.

'I'll just go down and see if the postman's left anything at Holland's
this morning,' said Amy Hewett, coming in between breakfast and the
time of starting for school.

She reached up to the key, but Clara, who sat by the fire with a cup of
tea on her lap, the only breakfast she ever took, surprised her by
saying, 'You needn't trouble, Amy. I shall be going out soon, and I'll
look in as I pass.'

The girl was disappointed, for she liked this private incursion into
the abode of other people, but the expression of a purpose by her
sister was so unusual that, after a moment's hesitating, she said,
'Very well,' and left the room again.

When silence informed Clara that the children were gone, Mrs. Eagles
being the only person besides herself who remained in the tenement, she
put on her hat, drew down the veil which was always attached to it, and
with the key in her hand descended to the Hollands' rooms. Had a letter
been delivered that morning, it would have been--in default of
box--just inside the door; there was none, but Clara seemed to have
another purpose in view. She closed the door and walked forward into
the nearest room; the blind was down, but the dusk thus produced was
familiar to her in consequence of her own habit, and, her veil thrown
back, she examined the chamber thoughtfully. It was a sitting-room,
ugly, orderly; the air felt damp, and even in semi-darkness she was
conscious of the layers of London dust which had softly deposited
themselves since the family went away forty-eight hours ago. A fire was
laid ready for lighting, and the smell of moist soot spread from the
grate. Having stood on one spot for nearly ten minutes, Clara made a
quick movement and withdrew; she latched the front door with as little
noise as possible, ran upstairs and shut herself again in her own room.

Presently she was standing at her window, the blind partly raised. On a
clear day the view from this room was of wide extent, embracing a great
part of the City; seen under a low, blurred, dripping sky, through the
ragged patches of smoke from chimneys innumerable, it had a gloomy
impressiveness well in keeping with the mind of her who brooded over
it. Directly in front, rising mist-detached from the lower masses of
building, stood in black majesty the dome of St. Paul's; its vastness
suffered no diminution from this high outlook, rather was exaggerated
by the flying scraps of mirky vapour which softened its outline and at
times gave it the appearance of floating on a vague troubled sea.
Somewhat nearer, amid many spires and steeples, lay the surly bulk of
Newgate, the lines of its construction shown plan-wise; its little
windows multiplied for points of torment to the vision. Nearer again,
the markets of Smithfield, Bartholomew's Hospital, the tract of modern
deformity, cleft by a gulf of railway, which spreads between
Clerkenwell Road and Charterhouse Street. Down in Farringdon Street the
carts, waggons, vans, cabs, omnibuses, crossed and intermingled in a
steaming splash-bath of mud; human beings, reduced to their due
paltriness, seemed to toil in exasperation along the strips of
pavement, bound on errands, which were a mockery, driven automaton-like
by forces they neither understood nor could resist.

'Can I go out into a world like that--alone?' was the thought which
made Clara's spirit fail as she stood gazing. 'Can I face life as it is
for women who grow old in earning bare daily bread among those terrible
streets? Year after year to go in and out from some wretched garret
that I call home, with my face hidden, my heart stabbed with misery
till it is cold and bloodless!

Then her eye fell upon the spire of St. James's Church, on Clerkenwell
Green, whose bells used to be so familiar to her. The memory was only
of discontent and futile aspiration, but--Oh, if it were possible to be
again as she was then, and yet keep the experience with which life had
since endowed her! With no moral condemnation did she view the records
of her rebellion; but how easy to see now that ignorance had been one
of the worst obstacles in her path, and that, like all unadvised
purchasers, she had paid a price that might well have been spared. A
little more craft, a little more patience--it is with these that the
world is conquered. The world was her enemy, and had proved too strong;
woman though she was--only a girl striving to attain the place for
which birth adapted her--pursuing only her irrepressible
instincts--fate flung her to the ground pitilessly, and bade her live
out the rest of her time in wretchedness.

No! There remained one more endeavour that was possible to her, one
bare hope of saving herself from the extremity which only now she
estimated at its full horror. If that failed, why, then, there was a
way to cure all ills.

From her box, that in which were hidden away many heart-breaking
mementoes of her life as an actress, she took out a sheet of notepaper
and an envelope. Without much thought, she wrote nearly three pages,
folded the letter, addressed it with a name only 'Mr. Kirkwood.'
Sidney's address she did not know; her father had mentioned Red Lion
Street, that was all. She did not even know whether he still worked at
the old place, but in that way she must try to find him. She cloaked
herself, took her umbrella, and went out.

At a corner of St. John's Square she soon found an urchin who would run
an errand for her. He was to take this note to a house that she
indicated, and to ask if Mr. Kirkwood was working there. She scarcely
durst hope to see the messenger returning with empty hands, but he did
so. A terrible throbbing at her heart, she went home again.

In the evening, when her father returned, she surprised him by saying
that she expected a visitor.

'Do you want me to go out of the way?' he asked, eager to submit to her
in everything.

'No. I've asked my friend to come to Mrs. Holland's. I thought there
would be no great harm. I shall go down just before nine o'clock.'

'Oh no, there's no harm,' conceded her father. 'It's only if the
neighbours opposite got talkin' to them when they come back.'

'I can't help it. They won't mind. I can't help it.'

John noticed her agitated repetition, the impatience with which she
flung aside difficulties.

'Clara--it ain't anything about work, my dear?'

'No, father. I wouldn't do anything without telling you; I've promised.'

'Then I don't care; it's all right.'

She had begun to speak immediately on his entering the room, and so it
happened that he had not kissed her as he always did at home-coming.
When she had sat down, he came with awkwardness and timidity and bent
his face to hers.

'What a hot cheek it is to-night, my little girl!' he murmured. 'I
don't like it; you've got a bit of fever hangin' about you.'

She wished to be alone; the children must not come into the room until
she had gone downstairs. When her father had left her, she seated
herself before the looking-glass, abhorrent as it was to her to look
thus in her own face, and began dressing her hair with quite unusual
attention. This beauty at least remained to her; arranged as she had
learned to do it for the stage, the dark abundance of her tresses
crowned nobly the head which once held itself with such defiant grace.
She did not change her dress, which, though it had suffered from wear,
was well-fitting and of better material than Farringdon Road Buildings
were wont to see; a sober draping which became her tall elegance as she
moved. At a quarter to nine she arranged the veil upon her head so that
she could throw her hat aside without disturbing it; then, taking the
lamp in her hand, and the key of the Hollands' door, she went forth.

No one met her on the stairs. She was safe in the cold deserted parlour
where she had stood this morning. Cold, doubtless, but she could not be
conscious of it; in her veins there seemed rather to be fire than
blood. Her brain was clear, but in an unnatural way; the throbbing at
her temples ought to have been painful, but only excited her with a
strange intensity of thought. And she felt, amid it all, a dread of
what was before her; only the fever, to which she abandoned herself
with a sort of reckless confidence, a faith that it would continue till
this interview was over, overcame an impulse to rush back into her
hiding-place, to bury herself in shame, or desperately whelm her
wretchedness in the final oblivion. . . .

He was very punctual. The heavy bell of St. Paul's had not reached its
ninth stroke when she heard his knock at the door.

He came in without speaking, and stood as if afraid to look at her. The
lamp, placed on a side-table, barely disclosed all the objects within
the four walls; it illumined Sidney's face, but Clara moved so that she
was in shadow. She began to speak.

'You understood my note? The people who live here are away, and I have
ventured to borrow their room. They are friends of my father's.'

At the first word, he was surprised by the change in her voice and
accentuation. Her speech was that of an educated woman; the melody
which always had such a charm for him had gained wonderfully in
richness. Yet it was with difficulty that she commanded utterance, and
her agitation touched him in a way quite other than he was prepared
for. In truth, he knew not what experience he had anticipated, but the
reality, now that it came, this unimaginable blending of memory with
the unfamiliar, this refinement of something that he had loved, this
note of pity struck within him by such subtle means, affected his
inmost self. Immediately he laid stern control upon his feelings, but
all the words which he had designed to speak were driven from memory.
He could say nothing, could only glance at her veiled face and await
what she had to ask of him.

'Will you sit down? I shall feel grateful if you can spare me a few
minutes. I have asked you to see me because--indeed, because I am sadly
in want of the kind of help a friend might give me. I don't venture to
call you that, but I thought of you; I hoped you wouldn't refuse to let
me speak to you. I am in such difficulties--such a hard position--'

'You may be very sure I will do anything I can to be of use to you,'
Sidney replied, his thick voice contrasting so strongly with that which
had just failed into silence that he coughed and lowered his tone after
the first few syllables. He meant to express himself without a hint of
emotion, but it was beyond his power. The words in which she spoke of
her calamity seemed so pathetically simple that they went to his heart.
Clara had recovered all her faculties. The fever and the anguish and
the dread were no whit diminished, but they helped instead of checking
her. An actress improvising her part, she regulated every tone with
perfect skill, with inspiration; the very attitude in which she seated
herself was a triumph of the artist's felicity.

'I just said a word or two in my note,' she resumed, 'that you might
have replied if you thought nothing could be gained by my speaking to
you. I couldn't explain fully what I had in mind. I don't know that
I've anything very clear to say even now, but--you know what has
happened to me; you know that I have nothing to look forward to, that I
can only hope to keep from being a burden to my father. I am getting
stronger; it's time I tried to find something to do. But I--'

Her voice failed again. Sidney gazed at her, and saw the dull lamplight
just glisten on her hair. She was bending forward a little, her hands
joined and resting on her knee.

'Have you thought what kind of--of work would be best for you?' Sidney
asked. The 'work' stuck in his throat, and he seemed to himself brutal
in his way of uttering it. But he was glad when he had put the question
thus directly; one at least of his resolves was carried out.

'I know I've no right to choose, when there's necessity,' she answered,
in a very low tone. 'Most women would naturally think of needlework;
but I know so little of it; I scarcely ever did any. If I could--I
might perhaps do that at home, and I feel--if I could only avoid--if I
could only be spared going among strangers--'

Her faltering voice sank lower and lower; she seemed as if she would
have hidden her face even under its veil.

'I feel sure you will have no difficulty,' Sidney hastened to reply,
his own voice unsteady. 'Certainly you can get work at home. Why do you
trouble yourself with the thought of going among strangers? There'll
never be the least need for that; I'm sure there won't. Haven't you
spoken about it to your father?'

'Yes. But he is so kind to me that he won't hear of work at all. It was
partly on that account that I took the step of appealing to you. He
doesn't know who I am meeting here to-night. Would you--I don't know
whether I ought to ask--but perhaps if you spoke to him in a day or
two, and made him understand how strong my wish is. He dreads lest we
should be parted, but I hope I shall never have to leave him. And then,
of course, father is not very well able to advise me--about work, I
mean. You have more experience. I am so helpless. Oh, if you knew how
helpless I feel!'

'If you really wish it, I will talk with your father--'

'Indeed, I do wish it. My coming to live here has made everything so
uncomfortable for him and the children. Even his friends can't visit
him as they would; I feel that, though he won't admit that it's made
any difference.'

Sidney looked to the ground. He heard her voice falter as it continued.

'If I'm to live here still, it mustn't be at the cost of all his
comfort. I keep almost always in the one room. I shouldn't be in the
way if anyone came. I've been afraid, Mr. Kirkwood, that perhaps you
feared to come lest, whilst I was not very well, it might have been an
inconvenience to us. Please don't think that. I shall never--see either
friends or strangers unless it is absolutely needful.'

There was silence.

'You do feel much better, I hope?' fell from Sidney's lips.

'Much stronger. It's only my mind; everything is so dark to me. You
know how little patience I always had. It was enough if any one said,
'You _must_ do this,' or 'You _must_ put up with that'--at once I
resisted. It was my nature; I couldn't bear the feeling of control.
That's what I've had to struggle with since I recovered from my
delirium at the hospital, and hadn't even the hope of dying. Can you
put yourself in my place, and imagine what I have suffered?'

Sidney was silent. His own life had not been without its passionate
miseries, but the modulations of this voice which had no light of
countenance to aid it raised him above the plane of common experience
and made actual to him the feelings he knew only in romantic story. He
could not stir, lest the slightest sound should jar on her speaking.
His breath rose visibly upon the chill air, but the discomfort of the
room was as indifferent to him as to his companion. Clara rose, as if
impelled by mental anguish; she stretched out her hand to the
mantel-piece, and so stood, between him and the light, her admirable
figure designed on a glimmering background.

'I know why you say nothing,' she continued, abruptly but without
resentment. 'You cannot use words of sympathy which would be anything
but formal, and you prefer to let me understand that. It is like you.
Oh, you mustn't think I mean the phrase as a reproach. Anything but
that. I mean that you were always honest, and time hasn't changed
you--in that.' A slight, very slight, tremor on the close. 'I'd rather
you behaved to me like your old self. A sham sympathy would drive me
mad.'

'I said nothing,' he replied, 'only because words seemed meaningless.'

'Not only that. You feel for me, I know, because you are not heartless;
but at the same time you obey your reason, which tells you that all I
suffer comes of my own self-will.'

'I should like you to think better of me than that. I'm not one of
those people, I hope, who use every accident to point a moral, and
begin by inventing the moral to suit their own convictions. I know all
the details of your misfortune.'

'Oh, wasn't it cruel that she should take such revenge upon me!' Her
voice rose in unrestrained emotion. 'Just because she envied me that
poor bit of advantage over her! How could I be expected to refuse the
chance that was offered? It would have been no use; she couldn't have
kept the part. And I was so near success. I had never had a chance of
showing what I could do. It wasn't much of a part, really, but it was
the lead, at all events, and it would have made people pay attention to
me. You don't know how strongly I was always drawn to the stage; there
I found the work for which I was meant. And I strove so hard to make my
way. I had no friends, no money. I earned only just enough to supply my
needs. I know what people think about actresses. Mr. Kirkwood, do you
imagine I have been living at my ease, congratulating myself that I had
escaped from all hardships?'

He could not raise his eyes. As she still awaited his answer, he said
in rather a hard voice:

'As I have told you, I read all the details that were published.

'Then you know that I was working hard and honestly--working far, far
harder than when I lived in Clerkenwell Close. But I don't know why I
am talking to you about it. It's all over. I went my own way, and I all
but won what I fought for. You may very well say, what's the use of
mourning over one's fate?'

Sidney had risen.

'You were strong in your resolve to succeed,' he said gravely, 'and you
will find strength to meet even this trial.'

'A weaker woman would suffer far less. One with a little more strength
of character would kill herself.'

'No. In that you mistake. You have not yourself only to think of. It
would be an easy thing to put an end to your life. You have a duty to
your father.'

She bent her head.

'I think of him. He is goodness itself to me. There are fathers who
would have shut the door in my face. I know better now than I could
when I was only a child how hard his life has been; he and I are like
each other so many ways; he has always been fighting against cruel
circumstances. It's right that you, who have been his true and helpful
friend, should remind me of my duty to him.'

A pause; then Sidney asked:

'Do you wish me to speak to him very soon about your finding
occupation?'

'If you will. If you could think of anything.'

He moved, but still delayed his offer to take leave.

'You said just now,' Clara continued, falteringly, 'that you did not
try to express sympathy, because words seemed of no use. How am I to
find words of thanks to you for coming here and listening to what I had
to say?'

'But surely so simple an act of friendship--'

'Have I so many friends? And what right have I to look to you for an
act of kindness? Did I merit it by my words when I last--'

There came a marvellous change--a change such as it needed either
exquisite feeling or the genius of simulation to express by means so
simple. Unable to show him by a smile, by a light in her eyes, what
mood had come upon her, what subtle shifting in the direction of her
thought had checked her words--by her mere movement as she stepped
lightly towards him, by the carriage of her head, by her hands half
held out and half drawn back again, she prepared him for what she was
about to say. No piece of acting was ever more delicately finished. He
knew that she smiled, though nothing of her face was visible; he knew
that her look was one of diffident, half-blushing pleasure. And then
came the sweetness of her accents, timorous, joyful, scarcely to be
recognised as the voice which an instant ago had trembled sadly in
self-reproach.

'But that seems to you so long ago, doesn't it? You can forgive me now.
Father has told me what happiness you have found, and I--I am so glad!'

Sidney drew back a step, involuntarily; the movement came of the shock
with which he heard her make such confident reference to the supposed
relations between himself and Jane Snowdon. He reddened--stood mute.
For a few seconds his mind was in the most painful whirl and conflict;
a hundred impressions, arguments, apprehensions, crowded upon him, each
with its puncturing torment. And Clara stood there waiting for his
reply, in the attitude of consummate grace.

'Of course I know what you speak of,' he said at length, with the
bluntness of confusion. 'But your father was mistaken. I don't know who
can have led him to believe that--It's a mistake, altogether.'

Sidney would not have believed that anyone could so completely rob him
of self-possession, least of all Clara Hewett. His face grew still more
heated. He was angry with he knew not whom, he knew not why--perhaps
with himself in the first instance.

'A mistake?' Clara murmured, under her breath. 'Oh, you mean people
have been too hasty in speaking about it. Do pardon me. I ought never
to have taken such a liberty--but I felt--'

She hesitated.

'It was no liberty at all. I dare say the mistake is natural enough to
those who know nothing of Miss Snowdon's circumstances. I myself,
however, have no right to talk about her. But what you have been told
is absolute error.'

Clara walked a few paces aside.

'Again I ask you to forgive me.' Her tones had not the same clearness
as hitherto. 'In any case, I had no right to approach such a subject in
speaking with you.'

'Let us put it aside,' said Sidney, mastering himself. 'We were just
agreeing that I should see your father, and make known your wish to
him.'

'Thank you. I shall tell him, when I go upstairs, that you were the
friend whom I had asked to come here. I felt it to be so uncertain
whether you would come.'

'I hope you couldn't seriously doubt it.'

'You teach me to tell the truth. No. I knew too well your kindness. I
knew that even to me--'

Sidney could converse no longer. He felt the need of being alone, to
put his thoughts in order, to resume his experiences during this
strange hour. An extreme weariness was possessing him, as though he had
been straining his intellect in attention to some difficult subject.
And all at once the dank, cold atmosphere of the room struck into his
blood; he had a fit of trembling.

'Let us say good-bye for the present.'

Clara gave her hand silently. He touched it for the first time, and
could not but notice its delicacy; it was very warm, too, and moist.
Without speaking she went with him to the outer door. His footsteps
sounded along the stone staircase; Clara listened until the last echo
was silent.

She too had begun to feel the chilly air. Hastily putting on her hat,
she took up the lamp, glanced round the room to see that nothing was
left in disorder, and hastened up to the fifth storey.

In the middle room, through which she had to pass, her father and Mr.
Eagles were talking together. The latter gave her a 'good-evening,'
respectful, almost as to a social superior. Within, Amy and Annie were
just going to bed. She sat with them in her usual silence for a quarter
of an hour, then, having ascertained that Eagles was gone into his own
chamber, went out to speak to her father.

'My friend came,' she said. 'Do you suspect who it was?'

'Why, no, I can't guess, Clara.'

'Haven't you thought of Mr. Kirkwood?'

'You don't mean that?'

'Father, you are quite mistaken about Jane Snowdon--quite.'

John started up from his seat.

'Has he told you so, himself?'

'Yes. But listen; you are not to say a word on that subject to him. You
will be very careful, father?'

John gazed at her wonderingly. She kissed his forehead, and withdrew to
the other room.




CHAPTER XXXII

A HAVEN

John Hewett no longer had membership in club or society. The loss of
his insurance-money made him for the future regard all such
institutions with angry suspicion. 'Workin' men ain't satisfied with
bein' robbed by the upper classes; they must go and rob one another.'
He had said good-bye to Clerkenwell Green; the lounging crowd no longer
found amusement in listening to his frenzied voice and in watching the
contortions of his rugged features. He discussed the old subjects with
Eagles, but the latter's computative mind was out of sympathy with zeal
of the tumid description; though quite capable of working himself into
madness on the details of the Budget, John was easily soothed by his
friend's calmer habits of debate. Kirkwood's influence, moreover, was
again exerting itself upon him--an influence less than ever likely to
encourage violence of thought or speech. In Sidney's company the worn
rebel became almost placid; his rude, fretted face fell into a singular
humility and mildness. Having ended by accepting what he would formerly
have called charity, and that from a man whom he had wronged with
obstinate perverseness, John neither committed the error of obtruding
his gratitude, nor yet suffered it to be imagined that obligation sat
upon him too lightly. He put no faith in Sidney's assertion that some
unknown benefactor was to be thanked for the new furniture; one and the
same pocket had supplied that and the money for Mrs. Hewett's burial.
Gratitude was all very well, but he could not have rested without
taking some measures towards a literal repayment of his debt. The
weekly coppers which had previously gone for club subscriptions were
now put away in a money-box; they would be long enough in making an
appreciable sum, but yet, if he himself could never discharge the
obligation, his children must take it up after him, and this he
frequently impressed upon Amy, Annie, and Tom.

Nothing, however, could have detached John's mind so completely from
its habits of tumult, nor have fixed it so firmly upon the interests of
home, as his recovery of his daughter. From the day of Clara's
establishment under his roof he thought of her, and of her only. Whilst
working at the filter-factory he remained in imagination by her side,
ceaselessly repeating her words of the night before, eagerly looking
for the hour that would allow him to return to her. Joy and trouble
mingled in an indescribable way to constitute his ordinary mood; one
moment he would laugh at a thought, and before a companion could glance
at him his gladness would be overshadowed as if with the heaviest
anxiety. Men who saw him day after day said at this time that he seemed
to be growing childish; he muttered to himself a good deal, and looked
blankly at you when you addressed him. In the course of a fortnight his
state became more settled, but it was not the cheerful impulse that
predominated. Out of the multitude of thoughts concerning Clara, one
had fixed itself as the main controller of his reflection.
Characteristically, John hit upon what seemed an irremediable
misfortune, and brooded over it with all his might. If only Sidney
Kirkwood were in the same mind as four years ago!

And now was he to believe that what he had been told about Sidney and
Jane Snowdon was misleading? Was the impossible no longer so? He almost
leapt from his chair when he heard that Sidney was the visitor with
whom his daughter had been having her private conversation. How came
they to make this appointment? There was something in Clara's voice
that set his nerves a-tremble. That night he could not sleep, and next
morning he went to work with a senile quiver in his body. For the first
time for more than two months he turned into a public-house on his way,
just to give himself a little 'tone.' The natural result of such a
tonic was to heighten the fever of his imagination; goodness knows how
far he had got in a drama of happiness before he threw off his coat and
settled to his day's labour.

Clara, in the meanwhile, suffered a corresponding agitation, more
penetrative in proportion to the finer substance of her nature. She did
not know until the scene was over how much vital force it had cost her;
when she took off the veil a fire danced before her eyes, and her limbs
ached and trembled as she lay down in the darkness. All night long she
was acting her part over and over; when she woke up, it was always at
the point where Sidney replied to her, 'But you are mistaken!'

Acting her part; yes, but a few hours had turned the make-believe into
something earnest enough. She could not now have met Kirkwood with the
self-possession of last evening. The fever that then sustained her was
much the same as she used to know before she had thoroughly accustomed
herself to appearing in front of an audience; it exalted all her
faculties, gifted her with a remarkable self-consciousness. It was all
very well as long as there was need of it, but why did it afflict her
in this torturing form now that she desired to rest, to think of what
she had gained, of what hope she might reasonably nourish? The purely
selfish project which, in her desperation, had seemed the only resource
remaining to her against a life of intolerable desolateness, was taking
hold upon her in a way she could not understand. Had she not already
made a discovery that surpassed all expectation? Sidney Kirkwood was
not bound to another woman; why could she not accept that as so much
clear gain, and deliberate as to her next step? She had been fully
prepared for the opposite state of things, prepared to strive against
any odds, to defy all probabilities, all restraints; why not thank her
fortune and plot collectedly now that the chances were so much improved?

But from the beginning of her interview with him, Clara knew that
something more entered into her designs on Sidney than a cold
self-interest. She had never loved him; she never loved anyone; yet the
inclinations of her early girlhood had been drawn by the force of the
love he offered her, and to this day she thought of him with a respect
and liking such as she had for no other man. When she heard from her
father that Sidney had forgotten her, had found some one by whom his
love was prized, her instant emotion was so like a pang of jealousy
that she marvelled at it. Suppose fate had prospered her, and she had
heard in the midst of triumphs that Sidney Kirkwood, the working man in
Clerkenwell, was going to marry a girl he loved, would any feeling of
this kind have come to her? Her indifference would have been complete.
It was calamity that made her so sensitive. Self-pity longs for the
compassion of others. That Sidney, who was once her slave, should stand
aloof in freedom now that she wanted sympathy so sorely, this was a
wound to her heart. That other woman had robbed her of something she
could not spare.

Jane Snowdon, too! She found it scarcely conceivable that the wretched
little starveling of Mrs. Peckover's kitchen should have grown into
anything that a man like Sidney could love. To be sure, there was a
mystery in her lot. Clara remembered perfectly how Scawthorne pointed
out of the cab at the old man Snowdon, and said that he was very rich.
A miser, or what? More she had never tried to discover. Now Sidney
himself had hinted at something in Jane's circumstances which, he
professed, put it out of the question that he could contemplate
marrying her. Had he told her the truth? Could she in fact consider him
free? Might there not be some reason for his wishing to keep a secret?

With burning temples, with feverish lips, she moved about her little
room like an animal in a cage, finding the length of the day
intolerable. She was constrained to inaction, when it seemed to her
that every moment in which she did not do something to keep Sidney in
mind of her was worse than lost. Could she not see that girl, Jane
Snowdon? But was not Sidney's denial as emphatic as it could be? She
recalled his words, and tried numberless interpretations. Would
anything that he had said bear being interpreted as a sign that
something of the old tenderness still lived in him? And the strange
thing was, that she interrogated herself on these points not at all
like a coldly scheming woman, who aims at something that is to be won,
if at all, by the subtlest practising on another's emotions, whilst she
remains unaffected. Rather like a woman who loves passionately, whose
ardour and jealous dread wax moment by moment.

For what was she scheming? For food, clothing, assured comfort during
her life? Twenty-four hours ago Clara would most likely have believed
that she had indeed fallen to this; but the meeting with Sidney
enlightened her. Least of all women could _she_ live by bread alone;
there was the hunger of her brain, the hunger of her heart. I spoke
once, you remember, of her 'defect of tenderness;' the fault remained,
but her heart was no longer so sterile of the tender emotions as when
revolt and ambition absorbed all her energies. She had begun to feel
gently towards her father; it was an intimation of the need which would
presently bring all the forces of her nature into play. She dreaded a
life of drudgery; she dreaded humiliation among her inferiors; but that
which she feared most of all was the barrenness of a lot into which
would enter none of the passionate joys of existence. Speak to Clara of
renunciation, of saintly glories, of the stony way of perfectness, and
you addressed her in an unknown tongue; nothing in her responded to
these ideas. Hopelessly defeated in the one way of aspiration which
promised a large life, her being, rebellious against the martyrdom it
had suffered, went forth eagerly towards the only happiness which was
any longer attainable. Her beauty was a dead thing; never by that means
could she command homage. But there is love, ay, and passionate love,
which can be independent of mere charm of face. In one man only could
she hope to inspire it; successful in that, she would taste victory,
and even in this fallen estate could make for herself a dominion.

In these few hours she so wrought upon her imagination as to believe
that the one love of her life had declared itself. She revived every
memory she possibly could of those years on the far side of the gulf,
and convinced herself that even then she had loved Sidney. Other love
of a certainty she had not known. In standing face to face with him
after so long an interval, she recognised the qualities which used to
impress her, and appraised them as formerly she could not. His features
had gained in attractiveness; the refinement which made them an index
to his character was more noticeable at the first glance, or perhaps
she was better able to distinguish it. The slight bluntness in his
manner reminded her of the moral force which she had known only as
something to be resisted; it was now one of the influences that drew
her to him. Had she not always admitted that he stood far above the
other men of his class whom she used to know? Between his mind and hers
there was distinct kinship; the sense that he had both power and right
to judge her explained in a great measure her attitude of defiance
towards him when she was determined to break away from her humble
conditions. All along, had not one of her main incentives to work and
strive been the resolve to justify herself in _his_ view, to prove to
_him_ that she possessed talent, to show herself to _him_ as one whom
the world admired? The repugnance with which she thought of meeting
him, when she came home with her father, meant in truth that she
dreaded to be assured that he could only shrink from her. All her vital
force-setting in this wild current, her self-deception complete, she
experienced the humility of supreme egoism--that state wherein self
multiplies its claims to pity in passionate support of its demand for
the object of desire. She felt capable of throwing herself at Sidney's
feet, and imploring him not to withdraw from her the love of which he
had given her so many assurances. She gazed at her scarred face until
the image was blurred with tears; then, as though there were luxury in
weeping, sobbed for an hour, crouching down in a corner of her room.
Even though his love were as dead as her beauty, must he not be struck
to the heart with compassion, realising her woeful lot? She asked
nothing more eagerly than to humiliate herself before him, to confess
that her pride was broken. Not a charge he could bring against her but
Bile would admit its truth. Had she been humble enough last night? When
he came again--and he must soon--she would throw aside every vestige of
dignity, lest he should think that she was strong enough to bear her
misery alone. No matter how poor-spirited she seemed, if only she could
move his sympathies.

Poor rebel heart! Beat for beat, in these moments it matched itself
with that of the purest woman who surrenders to a despairing love. Had
one charged her with insincerity, how vehemently would her conscience
have declared against the outrage! Natures such as hers are as little
to be judged by that which is conventionally the highest standard as by
that which is the lowest. The tendencies which we agree to call good
and had became in her merely directions of a native force which was at
all times in revolt against circumstance. Characters thus moulded may
go far in achievement, but can never pass beyond the bounds of
suffering. Never is the world their friend, nor the world's law. As
often as our conventions give us the opportunity, we crush them out of
being; they are noxious; they threaten the frame of society. Oftenest
the crushing is done in such a way that the hapless creatures seem to
have brought about their own destruction. Let us congratulate
ourselves; in one way or other it is assured that they shall not
trouble us long.

Her father was somewhat later than usual in returning from work. When
he entered her room she looked at him anxiously, and as he seemed to
have nothing particular to say, she asked if he had seen Mr. Kirkwood.

'No, my dear, I ain't seen him.'

Their eyes met for an instant. Clara was in anguish at the thought that
another night and day must pass and nothing be altered.

'When did you see him last? A week or more ago, wasn't it?'

'About that.'

'Couldn't you go round to his lodgings to-night? I know he's got
something he wants to speak to you about.'

He assented. But on his going into the other room Eagles met him with a
message from Sidney, anticipating his design, and requesting him to
step over to Red Lion Street in the course of the evening. John
instantly announced this to his daughter. She nodded, but said nothing.

In a few minutes John went on his way. The day's work had tired him
exceptionally, doubtless owing to his nervousness, and again on the way
to Sidney's he had recourse to a dose of the familiar stimulant. With
our eyes on a man of Hewett's station we note these little things; we
set them down as a point scored against him; yet if our business were
with a man of leisure, who, owing to worry, found his glass of wine at
luncheon and again at dinner an acceptable support, we certainly should
not think of paying attention to the matter. Poverty makes a crime of
every indulgence. John himself came out of the public-house in a
slinking way, and hoped Kirkwood might not scent the twopenny-worth of
gin.

Sidney was in anything but a mood to detect this little lapse in his
visitor. He gave John a chair, but could not sit still himself. The
garret was a spacious one, and whilst talking he moved from wall to
wall.

'You know that I saw Clara last night? She told me she should mention
it to you.'

'Yes, yes. I was afraid she'd never have made up her mind to it. It was
the best way for you to see her alone first, poor girl! You won't mind
comin' to us now, like you used?'

'Did she tell you what she wished to speak to me about?'

'Why, no, she hasn't. Was there--anything particular?'

'She feels the time very heavy on her hands. It seems you don't like
the thought of her looking for employment?'

John rose from his chair and grasped the back of it.

'You ain't a-goin' to encourage her to leave us? It ain't that you was
talkin' about, Sidney?'

'Leave you? Why, where should she go?'

'No, no; it's all right; so long as you wasn't thinkin' of her goin'
away again. See, Sidney, I ain't got nothing to say against it, if she
can find some kind of job for home. I know as the time must hang heavy.
There she sit, poor thing! from mornin' to night, an' can't get her
thoughts away from herself. It's easy enough to understand, ain't it? I
took a book home for her the other day, but she didn't seem to care
about it. There she sit, with her poor face on her hands, thinkin' and
thinkin'. It breaks my heart to see her. I'd rather she had some work,
but she mustn't go away from home for it.'

Sidney took a few steps in silence.

'You don't misunderstand me,' resumed the other, with suddenness. 'You
don't think as I won't trust her away from me. If she went, it 'ud be
because she thinks herself a burden--as if I wouldn't gladly live on a
crust for my day's food an' spare her goin' among strangers! You can
think yourself what it 'ud be to her, Sidney. No, no, it mustn't be
nothing o' that kind. But I can't ear to see her livin' as she does;
it's no life at all. I sit with her when I get back home at night, an'
I'm glad to say she seems to find it a pleasure to have me by her; but
it's the only bit o' pleasure she gets, an' there's all the hours
whilst I'm away. You see she don't take much to Mrs. Eagles; that ain't
her sort of friend. Not as she's got any pride left about her, poor
girl don't think that. I tell you, Sidney, she's a dear good girl to
her old father. If I could only see her a bit happier, I'd never
grumble again as long as I lived, I wouldn't!'

Is there such a thing in this world as speech that has but one simple
interpretation, one for him who utters it and for him who hears?
Honester words were never spoken than these in which Hewett strove to
represent Clara in a favourable light, and to show the pitifulness of
her situation; yet he himself was conscious that they implied a second
meaning, and Sidney was driven restlessly about the room by his
perception of the same lurking motive in their pathos. John felt
half-ashamed of himself when he ceased; it was a new thing for him to
be practising subtleties with a view to his own ends. But had he said a
word more than the truth?

I suppose it was the association of contrast that turned Sidney's
thoughts to Joseph Snowdon. At all events it was of him he was thinking
in the silence that followed. Which silence having been broken by a tap
at the door, oddly enough there stood Joseph himself. Hewett, taken by
surprise, showed embarrassment and awkwardness; it was always hard for
him to reconcile his present subordination to Mr. Snowdon with the
familiar terms on which they had been not long ago.

'Ah, you here, Hewett!' exclaimed Joseph, in a genial tone, designed to
put the other at his ease. 'I just wanted a word with our friend. Never
