mind; some other time.'

For all that, he did not seem disposed to withdraw, but stood with a
hand on the door, smiling. Sidney, having nodded to him, walked the
length of the room, his head bent and his hands behind him.

'Suppose I look in u bit later,' said Hewett. 'Or tomorrow night,
Sidney?'

'Very well, to-morrow night.'

John took his leave, and on the visitor who remained Sidney turned a
face almost of anger. Mr. Snowdon seated himself, supremely indifferent
to the inconvenience he had probably caused. He seemed in excellent
humour.

'Decent fellow, Hewett,' he observed, putting up one leg against the
fireplace. 'Very decent fellow. He's getting old, unfortunately. Had a
good deal of trouble, I understand; it breaks a man up.'

Sidney scowled, and said nothing.

'I thought I'd stay, as I _was_ here,' continued Joseph, unbuttoning
his respectable overcoat and throwing it open. 'There was something
rather particular I had in mind. Won't you sit down?'

'No, thank you.'

Joseph glanced at him, and smiled all the more.

'I've had a little talk with the old man about Jane. By-the-by, I'm
sorry to say he's very shaky; doesn't look himself at all. I didn't
know you had spoken to him quite so--you know what I mean. It seems to
be his idea that everything's at an end between you.'

'Perhaps so.'

'Well, now, look here. You won't mind me just--Do you think it was wise
to put it in that way to him? I'm afraid you're making him feel just a
little uncertain about you. I'm speaking as a friend, you know. In your
own interest, Kirkwood. Old men get queer ideas into their heads. You
know, he _might_ begin to think that you had some sort of--eh?'

It was not the second, nor yet the third, time that Joseph had looked
in and begun to speak in this scrappy way, continuing the tone of that
dialogue in which he had assumed a sort of community of interest
between Kirkwood and himself. But the limit of Sidney's endurance was
reached.

'There's no knowing,' he exclaimed, 'what anyone may think of me, if
people who have their own ends to serve go spreading calumnies. Let us
understand each other, and have done with it. I told Mr. Snowdon that I
could never be anything but a friend to Jane. I said it, and I meant
it. If you've any doubt remaining, in a few days I hope it'll be
removed. What your real wishes maybe I don't know, and I shall never
after this have any need to know. I can't help speaking in this way,
and I want to tell you once for all that there shall never again be a
word about Jane between us. Wait a day or two, and you'll know the
reason.'

Joseph affected an air of gravity--of offended dignity.

'That's rather a queer sort of way to back out of your engagements,
Kirkwood. I won't say anything about myself, but with regard to my
daughter--'

'What do you mean by speaking like that?' cried the young man, sternly.
'You know very well that it's what you wish most of all, to put an end
to everything between your daughter and me!  You've succeeded; be
satisfied. If you've anything to say to me on any other subject, say
it. If not, please let's have done for the present. I don't feel in a
mood for beating about the bush any longer.'

'You've misunderstood me altogether, Kirkwood,' said Joseph, unable to
conceal a twinkle of satisfaction in his eyes.

'No; I've understood you perfectly well--too well. I don't want to hear
another word on the subject, and I won't. It's over; understand that.'

'Well, well; you're a bit out of sorts. I'll say good-bye for the
present.'

He retired, and for a long time Sidney sat in black brooding.

John Hewett did not fail to present himself next evening. As he entered
the room he was somewhat surprised at the cheerful aspect with which
Sidney met him; the grasp which his hand received seemed to have a
significance. Sidney, after looking at him steadily, asked if he had
not been home.

'Yes, I've been home. Why do you want to know?'

'Hadn't Clara anything to tell you?'

'No. What is it?'

'Did she know you were coming here?'

'Why, yes; I mentioned it.'

Sidney again regarded him fixedly, with a smile.

'I suppose she preferred that I should tell you. I looked in at the
Buildings this afternoon, and had a talk with Clara.'

John hung upon his words, with lips slightly parted, with a trembling
in the hairs of his grey beard.

'You did?'

'I had something to ask her, so I went when she was likely to be alone.
It's a long while ago since I asked her the question for the first
time--but I've got the right answer at last.'

John stared at him in pathetic agitation.

'You mean to tell me you've asked Clara to marry you?'

'There's nothing very dreadful in that, I should think.'

'Give us your hand again! Sidney Kirkwood, give us your hand again! If
there's a good-hearted man in this world, if there's a faithful, honest
man, as only lives to do kindness--What am I to say to you? It's too
much for me. I can't find a word as I'd wish to speak. Stand out and
let's look at you. You make me as I can't neither speak nor see--I'm
just like a child--'

He broke down utterly, and shook with the choking struggle of laughter
and sobs. His emotion affected Sidney, who looked pale and troubled in
spite of the smile still clinging feebly about his lips.

'If it makes you glad to hear it,' said the young man, in an uncertain
voice, 'I'm all the more glad myself, on that account.'

'Makes me glad? That's no word for it, boy; that's no word for it! Give
us your hand again. I feel as if I'd ought to go down on my old knees
and crave your pardon. If only she could have lived to see this, the
poor woman as died when things was at their worst! If I'd only listened
to her there'd never have been them years of unfriendliness between us.
You've gone on with one kindness after another, but this is more than I
could ever a' thought possible. Why, I took it for certain as you was
goin' to marry that other young girl; they told me as it was all
settled.'

'A mistake.'

'I'd never have dared to hope it, Sidney. The one thing as I wished
more than anything else on earth, and I couldn't think ever to see it.
Glad's no word for what I feel. And to think as my girl kep' it from
me! Yes, yes; there was something on her face; I remember it now. "I'm
just goin' round to have a word with Sidney," I says. "Are you,
father?" she says. "Don't stay too long." And she had a sort o' smile I
couldn't quite understand. She'll be a good wife to you, Sidney. Her
heart's softened to all as she used to care for. She'll be a good and
faithful wife to you as long as she lives. But I must go back home and
speak to her. There ain't a man livin', let him be as rich as he may,
that feels such happiness as you've given me to-night.'

He went stumbling down the stairs, and walked homewards at a great
speed, so that when he reached the Buildings he had to wipe his face
and stand for a moment before beginning the ascent. The children were
at their home lessons; he astonished them by flinging his hat
mirthfully on to the table.

'Now then, father!' cried young Tom, the eight-year-old, whose pen was
knocked out of his hand.

With a chuckle John advanced to Clara's room. As he closed the door
behind him she rose. His face was mottled; there were tear-stains about
his eyes, and he had a wild, breathless look.

'An' you never told me! You let me go without half a word!'

Clara put her hands upon his shoulders and kissed him. 'I didn't quite
know whether it was true or not, father.'

'My darling! My dear girl! Come an' sit on my knee, like you used to
when you was a little 'un. I'm a rough old father for such as you, but
nobody'll never love you better than I do, an' always have done. So
he's been faithful to you, for all they said. There ain't a better man
livin'! "It's a long time since I first asked the question," he says,
"but she's give me the right answer at last." And he looks that glad of
it.'

'He does? You're sure he does?'

'Sure? Why, you should a' seen him when I went into the room! There's
nothing more as I wish for now. I only hope I may live a while longer,
to see you forget all your troubles, my dear. He'll make you happy,
will Sidney; he's got a deal more education than anyone else I ever
knew, and you'll suit each other. But you won't forget all about your
old father? You'll let me come an' have a talk with you now and then,
my dear, just you an' me together, you know?'

'I shall love you and be grateful to you always, father. You've kept a
warm heart for me all this time.'

'I couldn't do nothing else, Clara; you've always been what I loved
most, and you always will be.'

'If I hadn't had you to come back to, what would have become of me?'

'We'll never think of that. We'll never speak another word of that.'

'Father--Oh, if I had my face again! If I had my own face!'

A great anguish shook her; she lay in his arms and sobbed. It was the
farewell, even in her fulness of heart and deep sense of consolation,
to all she had most vehemently desired, Gratitude and self-pity being
indivisible in her emotions, she knew not herself whether the ache of
regret or the soothing restfulness of deliverance made her tears flow.
But at least there was no conscious duplicity, and for the moment no
doubt that she had found her haven. It is a virtuous world, and our
frequent condemnations are invariably based on justice; will it be
greatly harmful if for once we temper our righteous judgment with ever
so little mercy?




CHAPTER XXXIII

A FALL FROM THE IDEAL

Joseph Snowdon waxed daily in respectability. He was, for one thing,
clothing himself in flesh, and, though still anything but a portly man,
bore himself as becomes one who can indulge a taste for eating and
drinking; his step was more deliberate, he no longer presented the
suppleness of limb that so often accompanies a needy condition in the
man of wits, he grew attentive to his personal equipment, he was always
well combed and well shaven, and generally, in hours of leisure, you
perceived a fragrance breathing from his handkerchief. Nor was this
refinement addressed only to the public. To Clem he behaved with a
correctness which kept that lady in a state of acute suspicion; not
seldom he brought her a trifling gift, which he would offer with
compliments, and he made a point of consulting her pleasure or
convenience in all matters that affected them in common. A similar
dignity of bearing marked his relations with Hanover Street. When he
entered Jane's parlour it was with a beautiful blending of familiarity
and courtesy; he took his daughter's hand with an air of graceful
affection, retaining it for a moment between his own, and regarding her
with a gentle smile which hinted the pride of a parent. In speaking
with the old man he habitually subdued his voice, respectfully bending
forward, solicitously watching the opportunity of a service. Michael
had pleasure in his company and conversation. Without overdoing it,
Joseph accustomed himself to speak of philanthropic interests. He
propounded a scheme for supplying the poor with a certain excellent
filter at a price all but nominal; who did not know the benefit to
humble homes of pure water for use as a beverage? The filter was not
made yet, but Lake, Snowdon, & Co., had it under their consideration.

Michael kept his room a good deal in these wretched days of winter, so
that Joseph had no difficulty in obtaining private interviews with his
daughter. Every such occasion he used assiduously, his great end being
to possess himself of Jane's confidence. He did not succeed quite so
well with the girl as with her grandfather; there was always a reserve
in her behaviour which as yet he found it impossible to overcome.
Observation led him to conclude that much of this arose from the view
she took of his relations with Sidney Kirkwood. Jane was in love with
Sidney; on that point he could have no doubt; and in all likelihood she
regarded him as unfriendly to Sidney's suit--women are so shrewd in
these affairs. Accordingly, Joseph made it his business by artful
degrees to remove this prepossession from her mind. In the course of
this endeavour he naturally pressed into his service the gradually
discovered fact that Sidney had scruples of conscience regarding Jane's
fortune. Marvellous as it appeared to him, he had all but come to the
conclusion that this _was_ a fact. Now, given Jane's character, which
he believed he had sounded; given her love for Kirkwood, which was
obviously causing her anxiety and unhappiness; Joseph saw his way to an
admirable piece of strategy. What could be easier, if he played his
cards well and patiently enough, than to lead Jane to regard the
fortune as her most threatening enemy? Valuable results might come of
that, whether before or after the death of the old man.

The conversation in which he first ventured to strike this note
undisguisedly took place on the same evening as that unpleasant scene
when Sidney as good as quarrelled with him--the evening before the day
on which Sidney asked Clara Hewett to be his wife. Having found Jane
alone, he began to talk in his most paternal manner, his chair very
near hers, his eyes fixed on her sewing. And presently, when the ground
was prepared:

'Jane, there's something I've been wanting to say to you for a long
time. My dear, I'm uneasy about you.'

'Uneasy, father?' and she glanced at him nervously.

'Yes, I'm uneasy. But whether I ought to tell you why, I'm sure I don't
know. You're my own child, Janey, and you become dearer to me every
day; but--it's hard to say it--there naturally isn't all the confidence
between us that there might have been if--well, well, I won't speak of
that.'

'But won't you tell me what makes you anxious?'

He laid the tips of his fingers on her head. 'Janey, shall you be
offended if I speak about Mr. Kirkwood?'

'No, father.'

She tried in vain to continue sewing.

'My dear--I believe there's no actual engagement between you?'

'Oh no, father,' she replied, faintly.

'And yet--don't be angry with me, my child--I think you are something
more than friends?'

She made no answer.

'And I can't help thinking, Janey--I think about you very often
indeed--that Mr. Kirkwood has rather exaggerated views about the
necessity of--of altering things between you.'

Quite recently Joseph had become aware of the understanding between
Michael and Kirkwood. The old man still hesitated to break the news to
Jane, saying to himself that it was better for Sidney to prepare her by
the change in his behaviour.

'Of altering things?' Jane repeated, under her breath.

'It seems to me wrong--wrong to both of you,' Joseph pursued, in a
pathetic voice. 'I can't help noticing my child's looks. I know she
isn't what she used to be, poor little girl! And I know Kirkwood isn't
what he used to be. It's very hard, and I feel for you--for both of
you.'

Jane sat motionless, not daring to lift her eyes, scarcely daring to
breathe.

'Janey.'

'Yes, father.'

'I wonder whether I'm doing wrong to your grandfather in speaking to
you confidentially like this? I can't believe he notices things as I
do; he'd never wish you to be unhappy.'

'But I don't quite understand, father. What do you mean about Mr.
Kirkwood? Why should he--'

The impulse failed her. A fear which she had harboured for many weary
days was being confirmed and she could not ask directly for the word
that would kill hope.

'Have I a right to tell you? I thought perhaps you understood.'

'As you have gone so far, I think you must explain. I don't see how you
can be doing wrong.'

'Poor Kirkwood! You see, he's in such a delicate position, my dear. I
think myself that he's acting rather strangely, after everything; but
it's--it's your money, Jane. He doesn't think he ought to ask you to
marry him, under the circumstances.'

She trembled.

'Now who should stand by you, in a case like this, if not your own
father? Of course he can't say a word to you himself; and of course you
can't say a word to him; and altogether it's a pitiful business.'

Jane shrank from discussing such a topic with her father. Her next
words were uttered with difficulty.

'But the money isn't my own--it'll never be my own. He--Mr. Kirkwood
knows that.'

'He does, to be sure. But it makes no difference. He has told your
grandfather, my love, that--that the responsibility would be too great.
He has told him distinctly that everything's at an end--everything that
_might_ have happened.'

She just looked at him, then dropped her eyes on her sewing.

'Now, as your father, Janey, I know it's right that you should be told
of this. I feel you're being very cruelly treated, my child. And I wish
to goodness I could only see any way out of it for you both. Of course
I'm powerless either for acting or speaking: you can understand that.
But I want you to think of me as your truest friend, my love.'

More still he said, but Jane had no ears for it. When he left her, she
bade him good-bye mechanically, and stood on the same spot by the door,
without thought, stunned by what she had learnt.

That Sidney would be impelled to such a decision as this she had never
imagined. His reserve whilst yet she was in ignorance of her true
position she could understand: also his delaying for a while even after
everything had been explained to her. But that he should draw away from
her altogether seemed inexplicable, for it implied a change in him
which nothing had prepared her to think possible. Unaltered in his
love, he refused to share the task of her life, to aid in the work
which he regarded with such fervent sympathy. Her mind was not subtle
enough to conceive those objections to Michael's idea which had weighed
with Sidney almost from the first, for though she had herself shrunk
from the great undertaking, it was merely in weakness--a reason she
never dreamt of attributing to him. Nor had she caught as much as a
glimpse of those base, scheming interests, contact with which had
aroused Sidney's vehement disgust. Was her father to be trusted? This
was the first question that shaped itself in her mind. He did not like
Sidney; that she had felt all along, as well as the reciprocal coldness
on Sidney's part. But did his unfriendliness go so far as to prompt him
to intervene with untruths? 'Of course you can't say a word to
him'--that remark would bear an evil interpretation, which her
tormented mind did not fail to suggest. Moreover, he had seemed so
anxious that she should not broach the subject with her grandfather.
But what constrained her to silence? If, indeed, he had nothing but her
happiness at heart, he could not take it ill that she should seek to
understand the whole truth, and Michael must tell her whether Sidney
had indeed thus spoken to him.

Before she had obtained any show of control over her agitation Michael
came into the room. Evening was the old man's best time, and when he
had kept his own chamber through the day he liked to come and sit with
Jane as she had her supper.

'Didn't I hear your father's voice?' he asked, as he moved slowly to
his accustomed chair.

'Yes. He couldn't stay.'

Jane stood in an attitude of indecision. Having seated himself, Michael
glanced at her. His regard had not its old directness; it seemed
apprehensive, as if seeking to probe her thought.

'Has Miss Lant sent you the book she promised?'

'Yes, grandfather.'

This was a recently published volume dealing with charitable enterprise
in some part of London. Michael noticed with surprise the uninterested
tone of Jane's reply. Again he looked at her, and more searchingly.

'Would you like to read me a little of it?'

She reached the book from a side-table, drew near, and stood turning
the pages. The confusion of her mind was such that she could not have
read a word with understanding. Then she spoke, involuntarily.

'Grandfather, has Mr. Kirkwood said anything more--about me?'

The words made painful discord in her ears, but instead of showing
heightened colour she grew pallid. Holding the book partly open, she
felt all her nerves and muscles strained as if in some physical effort;
her feet were rooted to the spot.

'Have you heard anything from him?' returned the old man, resting his
hands on the sides of the easy-chair.

'Father has been speaking about him. He says Mr. Kirkwood has told you
something.'

'Yes. Come and sit down by me, Jane.'

She could not move nearer. Though unable to form a distinct conception,
she felt a foreboding of what must come to pass. The dread failure of
strength was more than threatening her; her heart was sinking, and by
no effort of will could she summon the thoughts that should aid her
against herself.

'What has your father told you?' Michael asked, when he perceived her
distress. He spoke with a revival of energy, clearly, commandingly.

'He says that Mr. Kirkwood wishes you to forget what he told you, and
what you repeated to me.'

'Did he give you any reason?'

'Yes. I don't understand, though.'

'Come here by me, Jane. Let's talk about it quietly. Sidney doesn't
feel able to help you as he thought he could. We mustn't blame him for
that; he must judge for himself. He thinks it'll be better if you
continue to be only friends.'

Jane averted her face, his steady look being more than she could bear.
For an instant a sense of uttermost shame thrilled through her, and
without knowing what she did, she moved a little and laid the book down.

'Come here, my child,' he repeated, in a gentler voice.

She approached him.

'You feel it hard. But when you've thought about it a little you won't
grieve; I'm sure you won't. Remember, your life is not to be like that
of ordinary women. You've higher objects before you, and you'll find a
higher reward. You know that, don't you? There's no need for me to
remind you of what we've talked about so often, is there? If it's a
sacrifice, you're strong enough to face it; yes, yes, strong enough to
face more than this, my Jane is! Only fix your thoughts on the work
you're going to do. It'll take up all your life, Jane, won't it? You'll
have no time to give to such things as occupy other women--no mind for
them.'

His grey eyes searched her countenance with that horrible intensity of
fanaticism which is so like the look of cruelty, of greed, of any
passion originating in the baser self. Unlike too, of course, but it is
the pitilessness common to both extremes that shows most strongly in an
old, wrinkled visage. He had laid his hand upon her. Every word was a
stab in the girl's heart, and so dreadful became her torture, so
intolerable the sense of being drawn by a fierce will away from all she
desired, that at length a cry escaped her lips. She fell on her knees
by him, and pleaded in a choking voice.

'I can't! Grandfather, don't ask it of me! Give it all to some one
else--to some one else! I'm not strong enough to make such a sacrifice.
Let me be as I was before!'

Michael's face darkened. He drew his hand away and rose from the seat;
with more than surprise, with anger and even bitterness, he looked down
at the crouching girl. She did not sob; her face buried in her arms,
she lay against the chair, quivering, silent.

'Jane, stand up and speak to me!'

She did not move.

'Jane!'

He laid his hand on her. Jane raised her head, and endeavoured to obey
him; in the act she moaned and fell insensible.

Michael strode to the door and called twice or thrice for Mrs. Byass;
then he stooped by the lifeless girl and supported her head. Bessie was
immediately at hand, with a cry of consternation, but also with helpful
activity.

'Why, I thought she'd got over this; it's a long time since she was
took last isn't it? Sam's downstairs, Mr. Snowdon; do just shout out to
him to go for some brandy. Tell him to bring my smelling-bottle first,
if he knows where it is--I'm blest if I do! Poor thing! She ain't been
at all well lately, and that's the truth.'

The truth, beyond a doubt. Pale face, showing now the thinness which it
had not wholly outgrown, the inheritance from miserable childhood; no
face of a stern heroine, counting as idle all the natural longings of
the heart, consecrated to a lifelong combat with giant wrongs. Nothing
better nor worse than the face of one who can love and must be loved in
turn.

She came to herself, and at the same moment Michael went from the room.

'There now; there now,' crooned Bessie, with much patting of the hands
and stroking of the checks. 'Why, what's come to you, Jane? Cry away;
don't try to prevent yourself; it'll do you good to cry a bit. Of
course, here comes Sam with all sorts of things, when there's no need
of him. He's always either too soon or too late, is Sam. Just look at
him, Jane; now if _he_ don't make you laugh, nothing will!'

Mr. Byass retired, shamefaced. Leaning against Bessie's shoulder, Jane
sobbed for a long time, sobbed in the misery of shame. She saw that her
grandfather had gone away. How should she ever face him after this? It
was precious comfort to feel Bessie's sturdy arms about her, and to
hear the foolish affectionate words, which asked nothing but that she
should take them kindly and have done with her trouble.

'Did grandfather tell you how it was?' she asked, with a sudden fear
lest Bessie should have learnt her pitiful weakness.

'Why, no; how did it come?'

'I don't know. We were talking. I can stand up now, Mrs. Byass, thank
you. I'll go up to my room. I've forgotten the time; is it late?'

It was only nine o'clock. Bessie would have gone upstairs with her, but
Jane insisted that she was quite herself. On the stairs she trod as
lightly as possible, and she closed her door without a sound. Alone,
she again gave way to tears. Michael's face was angry in her memory; he
had never looked at her in that way before, and now he would never look
with the old kindness. What a change had been wrought in these few
minutes!

And Sidney never anything but her friend--cold, meaningless word! If he
knew how she had fallen, would that be likely to bring him nearer to
her? She had lost both things, that was all.




CHAPTER XXXIV

THE DEBT REPAID

She rose early, in the murky cola of the winter morning. When, at eight
o'clock, she knocked as usual at her grandfather's door his answer made
her tremble.

'I shall be down in a few minutes, Jane; I'll have breakfast with you.'

It was long since he had risen at this hour. His voice sounded less
like that of an old man, and, in spite of his calling her by her name,
she felt the tone to be severe. When he reached the parlour he did not
offer to take her hand, and she feared to approach him. She saw that
his features bore the mark of sleeplessness. Hers, poor girl! were yet
more woeful in their pallor.

Through the meal he affected to occupy himself with the book Miss Lant
had sent--the sight of which was intolerable to Jane. And not for a
full hour did he speak anything but casual words. Jane had taken her
sewing; unexpectedly he addressed her.

'Let's have a word or two together, Jane. I think we ought to, oughtn't
we?'

She forced herself to regard him.

'I think you meant what you said last night?'

'Grandfather, I will do whatever you bid me. I'll do it faithfully. I
was ungrateful. I feel ashamed to have spoken so.'

'That's nothing to do with it, Jane. You're not ungrateful; anything
but that. But I've had a night to think over your words. You couldn't
speak like that if you weren't driven to it by the strongest feeling
you ever knew or will know. I hadn't thought of it in that way; I
hadn't thought of you in that way.'

He began gently, but in the last words was a touch of reproof, almost
of scorn. He gazed at her from under his grey eyebrows, perhaps hoping
to elicit some resistance of her spirit, some sign of strength that
would help him to reconstruct his shattered ideal.

'Grandfather, I'll try with all my strength to be what you wish--I
will!'

'And suppose the strength isn't sufficient, child?'

Even in her humility she could not but feel that this was unjust. Had
she ever boasted? Had she ever done more than promise tremblingly what
he demanded? But the fear was legitimate. A weak thing, all but
heart-broken, could she hope to tread firmly in any difficult path? She
hung her head, making no answer.

He examined her, seeming to measure the slightness of her frame. Sad,
unutterably sad, was the deep breath he drew as he turned his eyes away
again.

'Do you feel well this morning, Jane?'

'Yes, grandfather.'

'Have you slept?'

'I couldn't. You were grieving about me. I hoped never to have
disappointed you.'

He fell into reverie. Was he thinking of that poor wife of his, dead
long, long ago, the well-meaning girl of whom he had expected
impossible things? A second time had he thus erred, no longer with the
excuse of inexperience and hot blood. That cry of Jane's had made its
way to his heart. An enthusiast, he was yet capable of seeing by the
common light of day, when his affections were deeply stirred. And in
the night he had pondered much over his son's behaviour. Was he being
deceived in that quarter also, and there intentionally? Did Joseph know
this child better than he had done, and calculate upon her weakness?
The shock, instead of disabling him, had caused a revival of his
strength. He could walk more firmly this morning than at any time since
his accident. His brain was clear and active; he knew that it behoved
him to reconsider all he had been doing, and that quickly, ere it was
too late. He must even forget that aching of the heart until he had
leisure to indulge it.

'You shan't disappoint me, my dear,' he said gravely. 'It's my own
fault if I don't take your kindness as you mean it. I have to go out,
Jane, but I shall be back to dinner. Perhaps we'll talk again
afterwards.'

Of late, on the rare occasions of his leaving the house, he had always
told her where he was going, and for what purpose; Jane understood that
this confidence was at an end. When he was gone she found occupation
for a short time, but presently could only sit over the fire, nursing
her many griefs. She was no longer deemed worthy of confidence; worse
than that, she had no more faith in herself. If Sidney learnt what had
happened he could not even retain his respect for her. In this way she
thought of it, judging Kirkwood by the ideal standard, which
fortunately is so unlike human nature; taking it for granted--so
oppressed was her mind by the habit of dwelling on artificial
motives--that he only liked her because he had believed her strong in
purpose, forgetting altogether that his love had grown before he was
aware that anything unusual was required of her. She did remember,
indeed, that it was only the depth of her love for him which had caused
her disgrace; but, even if he came to understand that, it would not,
she feared, weigh in her favour against his judgment.

It was the natural result of the influences to which she had been
subjected. Her mind, overwrought by resolute contemplation of ideas
beyond its scope, her gentle nature bent beneath a burden of duty to
which it was unequal, and taught to consider with painful solemnity
those impulses of kindness which would otherwise have been merely the
simple joys of life, she had come to distrust every instinct which did
not subserve the supreme purpose. Even of Sidney's conduct she could
not reason in a natural way. Instinct would have bidden her reproach
him, though ever so gently; was it well done to draw away when he must
have known how she looked for his aid? Her artificial self urged, on
the other hand, that he had not acted thus without some gravely
considered motive. What it was she could not pretend to divine; her
faith in his nobleness overcame every perplexity. Of the persons
constituting this little group and playing their several parts, she
alone had fallen altogether below what was expected of her. As humble
now as in the days of her serfdom, Jane was incapable of revolting
against the tyranny of circumstances. Life had grown very hard for her
again, but she believed that this was to a great extent her own fault,
the outcome of her own unworthy weakness.

At Michael's return she did her best to betray no idle despondency.
Their midday meal was almost as silent as breakfast had been; his eyes
avoided her, and frequently he lost himself in thought. As he was
rising from the table Jane observed an unsteadiness in his movement; he
shook his head mechanically and leaned forward on both his hands, as if
feeling giddy. She approached him, but did not venture to speak.

'I'll go upstairs,' he said, having sighed slightly.

'May I come and read to you, grandfather?'

'Not just now, Jane. Go out whilst it's a bit fine.'

He went from the room, still with an unsteady walk. Reaching his own
room, where there was a cheerful fire, he sat down, and remained for a
long time unoccupied, save with his reflections. This chamber had
scarcely changed in a detail of its arrangement since he first came to
inhabit it. There was the chair which Sidney always used, and that on
which Jane had sat since she was the silent, frail child of thirteen.
Here had his vision taken form, growing more definite with the growth
of his granddaughter, seeming to become at length a splendid reality.
What talk had been held here between Kirkwood and himself whilst Jane
listened! All gone into silence; gone, too, the hope it had encouraged.

He was weary after the morning's absence from home, and fell into a
light slumber. Dreams troubled him. First he found himself in
Australia; he heard again the sudden news of his son's death; the shock
awoke him. Another dozing fit, and he was a young man with a wife and
children to support; haunted with the fear of coming to want; harsh,
unreasonable in his exactions at home. Something like a large black
coffin came into his dream, and in dread of it he again returned to
consciousness.

All night he had been thinking of the dark story of long ago--his
wife's form motionless on the bed--the bottle which told him what had
happened. Why must that memory revive to trouble his last days? Part of
his zeal for the great project had come of a feeling that he might thus
in some degree repair his former ill-doing; Jane would be a providence
to many hapless women whose burden was as heavy as his own wife's had
been. Must he abandon that solace? In any case he could bestow his
money for charitable purposes, but it would not be the same, it would
not effect what he had aimed at.

Late in the afternoon he drew from the inner pocket of his coat a long
envelope and took thence a folded paper. It was covered with clerkly
writing, which he perused several times. At length he tore the paper
slowly across the middle, again tore the fragments, and threw them on
to the fire. . . .

Jane obeyed her grandfather's word and went out for an hour. She wished
for news of Pennyloaf, who had been ill, and was now very near the time
of her confinement. At the door of the house in Merlin Place she was
surprised to encounter Bob Hewett, who stood in a lounging attitude; he
had never appeared to her so disreputable--not that his clothes were
worse than usual, but his face and hands were dirty, and the former was
set in a hang-dog look.

'Is your wife upstairs, Mr. Hewett?' Jane asked, when he had nodded
sullenly in reply to her greeting.

'Yes; and somebody else too as could have been dispensed with. There's
another mouth to feed.'

'No, there ain't,' cried a woman's voice just behind him.

Jane recognised the speaker, a Mrs. Griffin, who lived in the house and
was neighbourly to Pennyloaf.

'There ain't?' inquired Bob, gruffly.

'The child's dead.'

'Thank goodness for that, any way!'

Mrs. Griffin explained to Jane that the birth had taken place twelve
hours ago. Pennyloaf was 'very low,' but not in a state to cause
anxiety; perhaps it would be better for Jane to wait until to-morrow
before seeing her.

'She didn't say "thank goodness," added the woman, with a scornful
glance at Bob, 'but I don't think she's over sorry as it's gone, an'
small blame to her. There's some people as doesn't care much what sort
o' times she has--not meanin' _you_, Miss, but them as had _ought_ to
care.'

Bob looked more disreputable than ever. His eyes were fixed on Jane,
and with such a singular expression that the latter, meeting their
gaze, felt startled, she did not know why. At the same moment he
stepped down from the threshold and walked away without speaking.

'I shouldn't care to have _him_ for a 'usband,' pursued Mrs. Griffin.
'Of course he must go an' lose his work, just when his wife's wantin' a
few little extries, as you may say.'

'Lost his work?'

'Day 'fore yes'day. I don't like him, an' I don't like his ways; he'll
be gettin' into trouble before long, you mind what I say. His family's
a queer lot, 'cordin' to what they tell. Do you know them, Miss?'

'I used to, a long time ago.'

'You knew his sister--her as is come 'ome?'

'His sister?'

'Her as was a actress. Mrs. Bannister was tellin' me only last night;
she had it from Mrs. Horrocks, as heard from a friend of hers as lives
in the Farrin'don Buildin's, where the Hewetts lives too. They tell me
it was in the Sunday paper, though I don't remember nothing about it at
the time. It seems as how a woman threw vitrol over her an' burnt her
face so as there's no knowin' her, an' she goes about with a veil, an'
'cause she can't get her own livin' no more, of course she's come back
'ome, for all she ran away an' disgraced herself shameful.'

Jane gazed fixedly at the speaker, scarcely able to gather the sense of
what was said.

'Miss Hewett, you mean? Mr. Hewett's eldest daughter?'

'So I understand.'

'She has come home? When?'

'I can't just say; but a few weeks ago, I believe. They say it's nearly
two months since it was in the paper.'

'Does Mrs. Hewett know about it?'

'I can't say. She's never spoke to me as if she did. And, as I tell
you, I only heard yes'day myself. If you're a friend of theirs, p'r'aps
I hadn't oughtn't to a' mentioned it. It just come to my lips in the
way o' tallin'. Of course I don't know nothin' about the young woman
myself; it's only what you comes to 'ear in the way o' talkin', you
know.'

This apology was doubtless produced by the listener's troubled
countenance. Jane asked no further question, but said she would come to
see Pennyloaf on the morrow, and so took her leave.

At ten o'clock next morning, just when Jane was preparing for her visit
to Merlin Place, so possessed with anxiety to ascertain if Pennyloaf
knew anything about Clara Hewett that all her troubles were for the
moment in the back ground, Bessie Byass came running upstairs with a
strange announcement. Sidney Kirkwood had called, and wished to see
Miss Snowdon in private for a few minutes.

'Something must have happened,' said Jane, her heart standing still.

Bessie had a significant smile, but suppressed it when she noticed the
agitation into which her friend was fallen.

'Shall I ask him up into the front room?'

Michael was in his own chamber, which he had not left this morning. On
going to the parlour Jane found her visitor standing in expectancy.
Yes, something had happened; it needed but to look at him to be
convinced of that. And before a word was spoken Jane knew that his
coming had reference to Clara Hewett, knew it with the strangest
certainty.

'I didn't go to work this morning,' Sidney began, 'because I was very
anxious to see you--alone. I have something to speak about--to tell
you.'

'Let us sit down.'

Sidney waited till he met her look; she regarded him without
self-consciousness, without any effort to conceal her agitated interest.

'You see young Hewett and his wife sometimes. Have you heard from
either of them that Clara Hewett is living with her father again?'

'Not from them. A person in their house spoke about it yesterday. It
was the first I had heard.'

'Spoke of Miss Hewett? In a gossiping way, do you mean?'

'Yes.'

'Then you know what has happened to her?'

'If the woman told the truth.'

There was silence.

'Miss Snowdon--'

'Oh, I don't like you to speak so. You used to call me Jane.'

He looked at her in distress. She had spoken impulsively, but not with
the kind of emotion the words seem to imply. It was for his sake, not
for hers, that she broke that formal speech.

'You called me so when I was a child, Mr. Kirkwood,' she continued,
smiling for all she was so pale. 'It sounds as if something had
altered. You're my oldest friend, and won't you always be so? Whatever
you're going to tell me, surely it doesn't prevent us from being
friends, just the same as always?'

He had not seen her in her weakness, the night before last. As little
as he could imagine that, was he able to estimate the strength with
which she now redeemed her womanly dignity. His face told her what he
had to disclose. No question now of proving herself superior to common
feelings; it was Sidney who made appeal to her, and her heart went
forth to grant him all he desired.

'Jane--dear, good Jane--you remember what I said to you in the garden
at Danbury--that I had forgotten her. I thought it was true. But you
know what a terrible thing has befallen her. I should be less than a
man if I could say that she is nothing to me.'

'Have you spoken to her?'

'I have asked her to be my wife. Jane, if I had come to you yesterday,
before going to her, and had told you what I meant to do, and explained
all I felt, how the love of years ago had grown in me again, wouldn't
you have given me a friendly hand?'

'Just like I do now. Do you think I have forgotten one night when she
stood by me and saved me from cruel treatment, and then nursed me when
I fell ill?'

Neither of them had the habit of making long speeches. They understood
each other--very nearly; sufficiently, at all events, to make the bond
of sympathy between them stronger than ever. Jane was misled a little,
for she thought that here was the explanation of Sidney's withdrawing
his word to her grandfather; doubtless he heard of the calamity when it
happened. But on a more essential point she fell into no misconception.
Did Sidney desire that she should?

He held her hand until she gently drew it away.

'You will go up and tell grandfather,' she said, gravely; then added,
before he could speak, 'But I'll just see him first for a minute. He
hasn't been out of his room this morning yet. Please wait here.'

She left him, and Sidney fell back on his chair, woebegone, distracted.

Michael, brooding sorrowfully, at first paid no heed to Jane when she
entered his room. It was not long since he had risen, and his simple
breakfast, scarcely touched, was still on the table.

'Grandfather, Mr. Kirkwood is here, and wishes to speak to you.'

He collected himself, and, regarding her, became aware that she was
strongly moved.

'Wishes to see me, Jane? Then I suppose he came to see you first?'

Prepared now for anything unexpected, feeling that the links between
himself and these young people were artificial, and that he could but
watch, as if from a distance, the course of their lives, his first
supposition was, that Sidney had again altered his mind. He spoke
coldly, and had little inclination for the interview.

'Yes,' Jane replied, 'he came to see me, but only to tell me that he is
going to be married.'

His wrinkled face slowly gathered an expression of surprise.

'He will tell you who it is; he will explain. But I wanted to speak to
you first. Grandfather, I was afraid you might say something about me.
Will you--will you forget my foolishness? Will you think of me as you
did before? When he has spoken to you, you will understand why I am
content to put everything out of my mind, everything you and I talked
of. But I couldn't bear for him to know how I have disappointed you.
Will you let me be all I was to you before? Will you trust me again,
grandfather? You haven't spoken to him yet about me, have you?'

Michael shook his head.

'Then you will let it be as if nothing had happened? Grandfather--'

She bent beside him and took his hand. Michael looked at her with a
light once more in his eyes.

'Tell him to come. He shall hear nothing from me, Jane.'

'And you will try to forget it?'

'I wish nothing better. Tell him to come here, my child. When he's gone
we'll talk together again.'

The interview did not last long, and Sidney left the house without
seeing Jane a second time.

She would have promised anything now. Seeing that life had but one path
of happiness for her, the path hopelessly closed, what did it matter by
which of the innumerable other ways she accomplished her sad journey?
For an instant, whilst Sidney was still speaking, she caught a gleam of
hope in renunciation itself, the kind of strength which idealism is
fond of attributing to noble natures. A gleam only, and deceptive; she
knew it too well after the day spent by her grandfather's side,
encouraging, at the expense of her heart's blood, all his revived faith
in her. But she would not again give way. The old man should reap fruit
