
Inspector MacDonald had been staring at the newcomer with the greatest
amazement. "Well, this fairly beats me!" he cried at last. "If you
are Mr. John Douglas of Birlstone Manor, then whose death have we been
investigating for these two days, and where in the world have you
sprung from now? You seemed to me to come out of the floor like a
jack-in-a-box."

"Ah, Mr. Mac," said Holmes, shaking a reproving forefinger, "you
would not read that excellent local compilation which described the
concealment of King Charles. People did not hide in those days without
excellent hiding places, and the hiding place that has once been used
may be again. I had persuaded myself that we should find Mr. Douglas
under this roof."

"And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr. Holmes?"
said the inspector angrily. "How long have you allowed us to waste
ourselves upon a search that you knew to be an absurd one?"

"Not one instant, my dear Mr. Mac. Only last night did I form my views
of the case. As they could not be put to the proof until this evening, I
invited you and your colleague to take a holiday for the day. Pray what
more could I do? When I found the suit of clothes in the moat, it at
once became apparent to me that the body we had found could not have
been the body of Mr. John Douglas at all, but must be that of the
bicyclist from Tunbridge Wells. No other conclusion was possible.
Therefore I had to determine where Mr. John Douglas himself could be,
and the balance of probability was that with the connivance of his wife
and his friend he was concealed in a house which had such conveniences
for a fugitive, and awaiting quieter times when he could make his final
escape."

"Well, you figured it out about right," said Douglas approvingly. "I
thought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not sure how I stood under
it, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds once for all off my
track. Mind you, from first to last I have done nothing to be ashamed
of, and nothing that I would not do again; but you'll judge that for
yourselves when I tell you my story. Never mind warning me, Inspector:
I'm ready to stand pat upon the truth.

"I'm not going to begin at the beginning. That's all there," he
indicated my bundle of papers, "and a mighty queer yarn you'll find it.
It all comes down to this: That there are some men that have good cause
to hate me and would give their last dollar to know that they had got
me. So long as I am alive and they are alive, there is no safety in
this world for me. They hunted me from Chicago to California, then they
chased me out of America; but when I married and settled down in this
quiet spot I thought my last years were going to be peaceable.

"I never explained to my wife how things were. Why should I pull her
into it? She would never have a quiet moment again; but would always be
imagining trouble. I fancy she knew something, for I may have dropped a
word here or a word there; but until yesterday, after you gentlemen had
seen her, she never knew the rights of the matter. She told you all she
knew, and so did Barker here; for on the night when this thing happened
there was mighty little time for explanations. She knows everything now,
and I would have been a wiser man if I had told her sooner. But it was a
hard question, dear," he took her hand for an instant in his own, "and I
acted for the best.

"Well, gentlemen, the day before these happenings I was over in
Tunbridge Wells, and I got a glimpse of a man in the street. It was only
a glimpse; but I have a quick eye for these things, and I never doubted
who it was. It was the worst enemy I had among them all--one who has
been after me like a hungry wolf after a caribou all these years. I
knew there was trouble coming, and I came home and made ready for it. I
guessed I'd fight through it all right on my own, my luck was a proverb
in the States about '76. I never doubted that it would be with me still.

"I was on my guard all that next day, and never went out into the park.
It's as well, or he'd have had the drop on me with that buckshot gun of
his before ever I could draw on him. After the bridge was up--my mind
was always more restful when that bridge was up in the evenings--I put
the thing clear out of my head. I never dreamed of his getting into the
house and waiting for me. But when I made my round in my dressing
gown, as was my habit, I had no sooner entered the study than I scented
danger. I guess when a man has had dangers in his life--and I've had
more than most in my time--there is a kind of sixth sense that waves
the red flag. I saw the signal clear enough, and yet I couldn't tell you
why. Next instant I spotted a boot under the window curtain, and then I
saw why plain enough.

"I'd just the one candle that was in my hand; but there was a good light
from the hall lamp through the open door. I put down the candle and
jumped for a hammer that I'd left on the mantel. At the same moment he
sprang at me. I saw the glint of a knife, and I lashed at him with the
hammer. I got him somewhere; for the knife tinkled down on the floor. He
dodged round the table as quick as an eel, and a moment later he'd got
his gun from under his coat. I heard him cock it; but I had got hold of
it before he could fire. I had it by the barrel, and we wrestled for it
all ends up for a minute or more. It was death to the man that lost his
grip.

"He never lost his grip; but he got it butt downward for a moment too
long. Maybe it was I that pulled the trigger. Maybe we just jolted it
off between us. Anyhow, he got both barrels in the face, and there I
was, staring down at all that was left of Ted Baldwin. I'd recognized
him in the township, and again when he sprang for me; but his own mother
wouldn't recognize him as I saw him then. I'm used to rough work; but I
fairly turned sick at the sight of him.

"I was hanging on the side of the table when Barker came hurrying down.
I heard my wife coming, and I ran to the door and stopped her. It was no
sight for a woman. I promised I'd come to her soon. I said a word or two
to Barker--he took it all in at a glance--and we waited for the rest to
come along. But there was no sign of them. Then we understood that they
could hear nothing, and that all that had happened was known only to
ourselves.

"It was at that instant that the idea came to me. I was fairly dazzled
by the brilliance of it. The man's sleeve had slipped up and there was
the branded mark of the lodge upon his forearm. See here!"

The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own coat and cuff
to show a brown triangle within a circle exactly like that which we had
seen upon the dead man.

"It was the sight of that which started me on it. I seemed to see it all
clear at a glance. There were his height and hair and figure, about the
same as my own. No one could swear to his face, poor devil! I brought
down this suit of clothes, and in a quarter of an hour Barker and I had
put my dressing gown on him and he lay as you found him. We tied all his
things into a bundle, and I weighted them with the only weight I could
find and put them through the window. The card he had meant to lay upon
my body was lying beside his own.

"My rings were put on his finger; but when it came to the wedding ring,"
he held out his muscular hand, "you can see for yourselves that I had
struck the limit. I have not moved it since the day I was married, and
it would have taken a file to get it off. I don't know, anyhow, that I
should have cared to part with it; but if I had wanted to I couldn't.
So we just had to leave that detail to take care of itself. On the other
hand, I brought a bit of plaster down and put it where I am wearing one
myself at this instant. You slipped up there, Mr. Holmes, clever as
you are; for if you had chanced to take off that plaster you would have
found no cut underneath it.

"Well, that was the situation. If I could lie low for a while and then
get away where I could be joined by my 'widow' we should have a chance
at last of living in peace for the rest of our lives. These devils would
give me no rest so long as I was above ground; but if they saw in the
papers that Baldwin had got his man, there would be an end of all my
troubles. I hadn't much time to make it all clear to Barker and to my
wife; but they understood enough to be able to help me. I knew all about
this hiding place, so did Ames; but it never entered his head to connect
it with the matter. I retired into it, and it was up to Barker to do the
rest.

"I guess you can fill in for yourselves what he did. He opened the
window and made the mark on the sill to give an idea of how the murderer
escaped. It was a tall order, that; but as the bridge was up there was
no other way. Then, when everything was fixed, he rang the bell for all
he was worth. What happened afterward you know. And so, gentlemen, you
can do what you please; but I've told you the truth and the whole truth,
so help me God! What I ask you now is how do I stand by the English
law?"

There was a silence which was broken by Sherlock Holmes.

"The English law is in the main a just law. You will get no worse than
your deserts from that, Mr. Douglas. But I would ask you how did this
man know that you lived here, or how to get into your house, or where to
hide to get you?"

"I know nothing of this."

Holmes's face was very white and grave. "The story is not over yet, I
fear," said he. "You may find worse dangers than the English law, or
even than your enemies from America. I see trouble before you, Mr.
Douglas. You'll take my advice and still be on your guard."

And now, my long-suffering readers, I will ask you to come away with me
for a time, far from the Sussex Manor House of Birlstone, and far also
from the year of grace in which we made our eventful journey which ended
with the strange story of the man who had been known as John Douglas.
I wish you to journey back some twenty years in time, and westward some
thousands of miles in space, that I may lay before you a singular and
terrible narrative--so singular and so terrible that you may find it
hard to believe that even as I tell it, even so did it occur.

Do not think that I intrude one story before another is finished. As
you read on you will find that this is not so. And when I have detailed
those distant events and you have solved this mystery of the past, we
shall meet once more in those rooms on Baker Street, where this, like so
many other wonderful happenings, will find its end.





Part 2--The Scowrers




Chapter 1--The Man



It was the fourth of February in the year 1875. It had been a severe
winter, and the snow lay deep in the gorges of the Gilmerton Mountains.
The steam ploughs had, however, kept the railroad open, and the evening
train which connects the long line of coal-mining and iron-working
settlements was slowly groaning its way up the steep gradients which
lead from Stagville on the plain to Vermissa, the central township which
lies at the head of Vermissa Valley. From this point the track sweeps
downward to Bartons Crossing, Helmdale, and the purely agricultural
county of Merton. It was a single track railroad; but at every
siding--and they were numerous--long lines of trucks piled with coal and
iron ore told of the hidden wealth which had brought a rude population
and a bustling life to this most desolate corner of the United States of
America.

For desolate it was! Little could the first pioneer who had traversed
it have ever imagined that the fairest prairies and the most lush water
pastures were valueless compared to this gloomy land of black crag and
tangled forest. Above the dark and often scarcely penetrable woods upon
their flanks, the high, bare crowns of the mountains, white snow, and
jagged rock towered upon each flank, leaving a long, winding, tortuous
valley in the centre. Up this the little train was slowly crawling.

The oil lamps had just been lit in the leading passenger car, a long,
bare carriage in which some twenty or thirty people were seated. The
greater number of these were workmen returning from their day's toil in
the lower part of the valley. At least a dozen, by their grimed faces
and the safety lanterns which they carried, proclaimed themselves
miners. These sat smoking in a group and conversed in low voices,
glancing occasionally at two men on the opposite side of the car, whose
uniforms and badges showed them to be policemen.

Several women of the labouring class and one or two travellers who might
have been small local storekeepers made up the rest of the company, with
the exception of one young man in a corner by himself. It is with this
man that we are concerned. Take a good look at him; for he is worth it.

He is a fresh-complexioned, middle-sized young man, not far, one would
guess, from his thirtieth year. He has large, shrewd, humorous gray eyes
which twinkle inquiringly from time to time as he looks round through
his spectacles at the people about him. It is easy to see that he is of
a sociable and possibly simple disposition, anxious to be friendly to
all men. Anyone could pick him at once as gregarious in his habits and
communicative in his nature, with a quick wit and a ready smile. And yet
the man who studied him more closely might discern a certain firmness
of jaw and grim tightness about the lips which would warn him that there
were depths beyond, and that this pleasant, brown-haired young Irishman
might conceivably leave his mark for good or evil upon any society to
which he was introduced.

Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest miner, and
receiving only short, gruff replies, the traveller resigned himself to
uncongenial silence, staring moodily out of the window at the fading
landscape.

It was not a cheering prospect. Through the growing gloom there pulsed
the red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills. Great heaps of
slag and dumps of cinders loomed up on each side, with the high shafts
of the collieries towering above them. Huddled groups of mean, wooden
houses, the windows of which were beginning to outline themselves in
light, were scattered here and there along the line, and the frequent
halting places were crowded with their swarthy inhabitants.

The iron and coal valleys of the Vermissa district were no resorts for
the leisured or the cultured. Everywhere there were stern signs of the
crudest battle of life, the rude work to be done, and the rude, strong
workers who did it.

The young traveller gazed out into this dismal country with a face of
mingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the scene was new to
him. At intervals he drew from his pocket a bulky letter to which he
referred, and on the margins of which he scribbled some notes. Once from
the back of his waist he produced something which one would hardly have
expected to find in the possession of so mild-mannered a man. It was
a navy revolver of the largest size. As he turned it slantwise to the
light, the glint upon the rims of the copper shells within the drum
showed that it was fully loaded. He quickly restored it to his secret
pocket, but not before it had been observed by a working man who had
seated himself upon the adjoining bench.

"Hullo, mate!" said he. "You seem heeled and ready."

The young man smiled with an air of embarrassment.

"Yes," said he, "we need them sometimes in the place I come from."

"And where may that be?"

"I'm last from Chicago."

"A stranger in these parts?"

"Yes."

"You may find you need it here," said the workman.

"Ah! is that so?" The young man seemed interested.

"Have you heard nothing of doings hereabouts?"

"Nothing out of the way."

"Why, I thought the country was full of it. You'll hear quick enough.
What made you come here?"

"I heard there was always work for a willing man."

"Are you a member of the union?"

"Sure."

"Then you'll get your job, I guess. Have you any friends?"

"Not yet; but I have the means of making them."

"How's that, then?"

"I am one of the Eminent Order of Freemen. There's no town without a
lodge, and where there is a lodge I'll find my friends."

The remark had a singular effect upon his companion. He glanced round
suspiciously at the others in the car. The miners were still whispering
among themselves. The two police officers were dozing. He came across,
seated himself close to the young traveller, and held out his hand.

"Put it there," he said.

A hand-grip passed between the two.

"I see you speak the truth," said the workman. "But it's well to make
certain." He raised his right hand to his right eyebrow. The traveller
at once raised his left hand to his left eyebrow.

"Dark nights are unpleasant," said the workman.

"Yes, for strangers to travel," the other answered.

"That's good enough. I'm Brother Scanlan, Lodge 341, Vermissa Valley.
Glad to see you in these parts."

"Thank you. I'm Brother John McMurdo, Lodge 29, Chicago. Bodymaster J.H.
Scott. But I am in luck to meet a brother so early."

"Well, there are plenty of us about. You won't find the order more
flourishing anywhere in the States than right here in Vermissa Valley.
But we could do with some lads like you. I can't understand a spry man
of the union finding no work to do in Chicago."

"I found plenty of work to do," said McMurdo.

"Then why did you leave?"

McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled. "I guess those chaps
would be glad to know," he said.

Scanlan groaned sympathetically. "In trouble?" he asked in a whisper.

"Deep."

"A penitentiary job?"

"And the rest."

"Not a killing!"

"It's early days to talk of such things," said McMurdo with the air of
a man who had been surprised into saying more than he intended. "I've
my own good reasons for leaving Chicago, and let that be enough for you.
Who are you that you should take it on yourself to ask such things?"
His gray eyes gleamed with sudden and dangerous anger from behind his
glasses.

"All right, mate, no offense meant. The boys will think none the worse
of you, whatever you may have done. Where are you bound for now?"

"Vermissa."

"That's the third halt down the line. Where are you staying?"

McMurdo took out an envelope and held it close to the murky oil lamp.
"Here is the address--Jacob Shafter, Sheridan Street. It's a boarding
house that was recommended by a man I knew in Chicago."

"Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. I live at
Hobson's Patch, and that's here where we are drawing up. But, say,
there's one bit of advice I'll give you before we part: If you're
in trouble in Vermissa, go straight to the Union House and see Boss
McGinty. He is the Bodymaster of Vermissa Lodge, and nothing can happen
in these parts unless Black Jack McGinty wants it. So long, mate! Maybe
we'll meet in lodge one of these evenings. But mind my words: If you are
in trouble, go to Boss McGinty."

Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his thoughts.
Night had now fallen, and the flames of the frequent furnaces were
roaring and leaping in the darkness. Against their lurid background
dark figures were bending and straining, twisting and turning, with the
motion of winch or of windlass, to the rhythm of an eternal clank and
roar.

"I guess hell must look something like that," said a voice.

McMurdo turned and saw that one of the policemen had shifted in his seat
and was staring out into the fiery waste.

"For that matter," said the other policeman, "I allow that hell must BE
something like that. If there are worse devils down yonder than some we
could name, it's more than I'd expect. I guess you are new to this part,
young man?"

"Well, what if I am?" McMurdo answered in a surly voice.

"Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful in choosing
your friends. I don't think I'd begin with Mike Scanlan or his gang if I
were you."

"What the hell is it to you who are my friends?" roared McMurdo in a
voice which brought every head in the carriage round to witness the
altercation. "Did I ask you for your advice, or did you think me such
a sucker that I couldn't move without it? You speak when you are spoken
to, and by the Lord you'd have to wait a long time if it was me!" He
thrust out his face and grinned at the patrolmen like a snarling dog.

The two policemen, heavy, good-natured men, were taken aback by the
extraordinary vehemence with which their friendly advances had been
rejected.

"No offense, stranger," said one. "It was a warning for your own good,
seeing that you are, by your own showing, new to the place."

"I'm new to the place; but I'm not new to you and your kind!" cried
McMurdo in cold fury. "I guess you're the same in all places, shoving
your advice in when nobody asks for it."

"Maybe we'll see more of you before very long," said one of the
patrolmen with a grin. "You're a real hand-picked one, if I am a judge."

"I was thinking the same," remarked the other. "I guess we may meet
again."

"I'm not afraid of you, and don't you think it!" cried McMurdo. "My
name's Jack McMurdo--see? If you want me, you'll find me at Jacob
Shafter's on Sheridan Street, Vermissa; so I'm not hiding from you, am
I? Day or night I dare to look the like of you in the face--don't make
any mistake about that!"

There was a murmur of sympathy and admiration from the miners at the
dauntless demeanour of the newcomer, while the two policemen shrugged
their shoulders and renewed a conversation between themselves.

A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and there
was a general clearing; for Vermissa was by far the largest town on the
line. McMurdo picked up his leather gripsack and was about to start off
into the darkness, when one of the miners accosted him.

"By Gar, mate! you know how to speak to the cops," he said in a voice of
awe. "It was grand to hear you. Let me carry your grip and show you the
road. I'm passing Shafter's on the way to my own shack."

There was a chorus of friendly "Good-nights" from the other miners
as they passed from the platform. Before ever he had set foot in it,
McMurdo the turbulent had become a character in Vermissa.

The country had been a place of terror; but the town was in its way
even more depressing. Down that long valley there was at least a certain
gloomy grandeur in the huge fires and the clouds of drifting smoke,
while the strength and industry of man found fitting monuments in the
hills which he had spilled by the side of his monstrous excavations.
But the town showed a dead level of mean ugliness and squalor. The broad
street was churned up by the traffic into a horrible rutted paste of
muddy snow. The sidewalks were narrow and uneven. The numerous gas-lamps
served only to show more clearly a long line of wooden houses, each with
its veranda facing the street, unkempt and dirty.

As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by a
row of well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons and gaming
houses, in which the miners spent their hard-earned but generous wages.

"That's the Union House," said the guide, pointing to one saloon which
rose almost to the dignity of being a hotel. "Jack McGinty is the boss
there."

"What sort of a man is he?" McMurdo asked.

"What! have you never heard of the boss?"

"How could I have heard of him when you know that I am a stranger in
these parts?"

"Well, I thought his name was known clear across the country. It's been
in the papers often enough."

"What for?"

"Well," the miner lowered his voice--"over the affairs."

"What affairs?"

"Good Lord, mister! you are queer, if I must say it without offense.
There's only one set of affairs that you'll hear of in these parts, and
that's the affairs of the Scowrers."

"Why, I seem to have read of the Scowrers in Chicago. A gang of
murderers, are they not?"

"Hush, on your life!" cried the miner, standing still in alarm, and
gazing in amazement at his companion. "Man, you won't live long in these
parts if you speak in the open street like that. Many a man has had the
life beaten out of him for less."

"Well, I know nothing about them. It's only what I have read."

"And I'm not saying that you have not read the truth." The man looked
nervously round him as he spoke, peering into the shadows as if he
feared to see some lurking danger. "If killing is murder, then God knows
there is murder and to spare. But don't you dare to breathe the name
of Jack McGinty in connection with it, stranger; for every whisper
goes back to him, and he is not one that is likely to let it pass. Now,
that's the house you're after, that one standing back from the street.
You'll find old Jacob Shafter that runs it as honest a man as lives in
this township."

"I thank you," said McMurdo, and shaking hands with his new acquaintance
he plodded, gripsack in hand, up the path which led to the dwelling
house, at the door of which he gave a resounding knock.

It was opened at once by someone very different from what he had
expected. It was a woman, young and singularly beautiful. She was of the
German type, blonde and fair-haired, with the piquant contrast of a
pair of beautiful dark eyes with which she surveyed the stranger with
surprise and a pleasing embarrassment which brought a wave of colour
over her pale face. Framed in the bright light of the open doorway, it
seemed to McMurdo that he had never seen a more beautiful picture;
the more attractive for its contrast with the sordid and gloomy
surroundings. A lovely violet growing upon one of those black slag-heaps
of the mines would not have seemed more surprising. So entranced was
he that he stood staring without a word, and it was she who broke the
silence.

"I thought it was father," said she with a pleasing little touch of a
German accent. "Did you come to see him? He is down town. I expect him
back every minute."

McMurdo continued to gaze at her in open admiration until her eyes
dropped in confusion before this masterful visitor.

"No, miss," he said at last, "I'm in no hurry to see him. But your house
was recommended to me for board. I thought it might suit me--and now I
know it will."

"You are quick to make up your mind," said she with a smile.

"Anyone but a blind man could do as much," the other answered.

She laughed at the compliment. "Come right in, sir," she said. "I'm Miss
Ettie Shafter, Mr. Shafter's daughter. My mother's dead, and I run the
house. You can sit down by the stove in the front room until father
comes along--Ah, here he is! So you can fix things with him right away."

A heavy, elderly man came plodding up the path. In a few words McMurdo
explained his business. A man of the name of Murphy had given him the
address in Chicago. He in turn had had it from someone else. Old Shafter
was quite ready. The stranger made no bones about terms, agreed at once
to every condition, and was apparently fairly flush of money. For seven
dollars a week paid in advance he was to have board and lodging.

So it was that McMurdo, the self-confessed fugitive from justice, took
up his abode under the roof of the Shafters, the first step which was
to lead to so long and dark a train of events, ending in a far distant
land.




Chapter 2--The Bodymaster



McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly. Wherever he was the folk
around soon knew it. Within a week he had become infinitely the most
important person at Shafter's. There were ten or a dozen boarders there;
but they were honest foremen or commonplace clerks from the stores, of a
very different calibre from the young Irishman. Of an evening when they
gathered together his joke was always the readiest, his conversation the
brightest, and his song the best. He was a born boon companion, with a
magnetism which drew good humour from all around him.

And yet he showed again and again, as he had shown in the railway
carriage, a capacity for sudden, fierce anger, which compelled the
respect and even the fear of those who met him. For the law, too, and
all who were connected with it, he exhibited a bitter contempt which
delighted some and alarmed others of his fellow boarders.

From the first he made it evident, by his open admiration, that the
daughter of the house had won his heart from the instant that he had set
eyes upon her beauty and her grace. He was no backward suitor. On
the second day he told her that he loved her, and from then onward he
repeated the same story with an absolute disregard of what she might say
to discourage him.

"Someone else?" he would cry. "Well, the worse luck for someone else!
Let him look out for himself! Am I to lose my life's chance and all my
heart's desire for someone else? You can keep on saying no, Ettie: the
day will come when you will say yes, and I'm young enough to wait."

He was a dangerous suitor, with his glib Irish tongue, and his pretty,
coaxing ways. There was about him also that glamour of experience and
of mystery which attracts a woman's interest, and finally her love. He
could talk of the sweet valleys of County Monaghan from which he came,
of the lovely, distant island, the low hills and green meadows of which
seemed the more beautiful when imagination viewed them from this place
of grime and snow.

Then he was versed in the life of the cities of the North, of Detroit,
and the lumber camps of Michigan, and finally of Chicago, where he had
worked in a planing mill. And afterwards came the hint of romance, the
feeling that strange things had happened to him in that great city,
so strange and so intimate that they might not be spoken of. He spoke
wistfully of a sudden leaving, a breaking of old ties, a flight into
a strange world, ending in this dreary valley, and Ettie listened, her
dark eyes gleaming with pity and with sympathy--those two qualities
which may turn so rapidly and so naturally to love.


McMurdo had obtained a temporary job as bookkeeper for he was a
well-educated man. This kept him out most of the day, and he had not
found occasion yet to report himself to the head of the lodge of the
Eminent Order of Freemen. He was reminded of his omission, however, by
a visit one evening from Mike Scanlan, the fellow member whom he had met
in the train. Scanlan, the small, sharp-faced, nervous, black-eyed man,
seemed glad to see him once more. After a glass or two of whisky he
broached the object of his visit.

"Say, McMurdo," said he, "I remembered your address, so I made bold
to call. I'm surprised that you've not reported to the Bodymaster. Why
haven't you seen Boss McGinty yet?"

"Well, I had to find a job. I have been busy."

"You must find time for him if you have none for anything else. Good
Lord, man! you're a fool not to have been down to the Union House and
registered your name the first morning after you came here! If you run
against him--well, you mustn't, that's all!"

McMurdo showed mild surprise. "I've been a member of the lodge for over
two years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties were so pressing as
all that."

"Maybe not in Chicago."

"Well, it's the same society here."

"Is it?"

Scanlan looked at him long and fixedly. There was something sinister in
his eyes.

"Isn't it?"

"You'll tell me that in a month's time. I hear you had a talk with the
patrolmen after I left the train."

"How did you know that?"

"Oh, it got about--things do get about for good and for bad in this
district."

"Well, yes. I told the hounds what I thought of them."

"By the Lord, you'll be a man after McGinty's heart!"

"What, does he hate the police too?"

Scanlan burst out laughing. "You go and see him, my lad," said he as
he took his leave. "It's not the police but you that he'll hate if you
don't! Now, take a friend's advice and go at once!"


It chanced that on the same evening McMurdo had another more pressing
interview which urged him in the same direction. It may have been that
his attentions to Ettie had been more evident than before, or that they
had gradually obtruded themselves into the slow mind of his good German
host; but, whatever the cause, the boarding-house keeper beckoned the
young man into his private room and started on the subject without any
circumlocution.

"It seems to me, mister," said he, "that you are gettin' set on my
Ettie. Ain't that so, or am I wrong?"

"Yes, that is so," the young man answered.

"Vell, I vant to tell you right now that it ain't no manner of use.
There's someone slipped in afore you."

"She told me so."

"Vell, you can lay that she told you truth. But did she tell you who it
vas?"

"No, I asked her; but she wouldn't tell."

"I dare say not, the leetle baggage! Perhaps she did not vish to
frighten you avay."

"Frighten!" McMurdo was on fire in a moment.

"Ah, yes, my friend! You need not be ashamed to be frightened of him. It
is Teddy Baldwin."

"And who the devil is he?"

"He is a boss of Scowrers."

"Scowrers! I've heard of them before. It's Scowrers here and Scowrers
there, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid of? Who are the
Scowrers?"

The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as everyone did
who talked about that terrible society. "The Scowrers," said he, "are
the Eminent Order of Freemen!"

The young man stared. "Why, I am a member of that order myself."

"You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known it--not if
you vere to pay me a hundred dollar a veek."

"What's wrong with the order? It's for charity and good fellowship. The
rules say so."

"Maybe in some places. Not here!"

"What is it here?"

"It's a murder society, that's vat it is."

McMurdo laughed incredulously. "How can you prove that?" he asked.

"Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about Milman and
Van Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr. Hyam, and little
Billy James, and the others? Prove it! Is there a man or a voman in this
valley vat does not know it?"

"See here!" said McMurdo earnestly. "I want you to take back what you've
said, or else make it good. One or the other you must do before I quit
this room. Put yourself in my place. Here am I, a stranger in the town.
I belong to a society that I know only as an innocent one. You'll
find it through the length and breadth of the States, but always as an
innocent one. Now, when I am counting upon joining it here, you tell me
that it is the same as a murder society called the Scowrers. I guess you
owe me either an apology or else an explanation, Mr. Shafter."

"I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows, mister. The bosses of the
one are the bosses of the other. If you offend the one, it is the other
vat vill strike you. We have proved it too often."

"That's just gossip--I want proof!" said McMurdo.

"If you live here long you vill get your proof. But I forget that you
are yourself one of them. You vill soon be as bad as the rest. But you
vill find other lodgings, mister. I cannot have you here. Is it not bad
enough that one of these people come courting my Ettie, and that I dare
not turn him down, but that I should have another for my boarder? Yes,
indeed, you shall not sleep here after to-night!"


McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both from his
comfortable quarters and from the girl whom he loved. He found her alone
in the sitting-room that same evening, and he poured his troubles into
her ear.

"Sure, your father is after giving me notice," he said. "It's little I
would care if it was just my room, but indeed, Ettie, though it's only
a week that I've known you, you are the very breath of life to me, and I
can't live without you!"

"Oh, hush, Mr. McMurdo, don't speak so!" said the girl. "I have told
you, have I not, that you are too late? There is another, and if I have
not promised to marry him at once, at least I can promise no one else."

"Suppose I had been first, Ettie, would I have had a chance?"

The girl sank her face into her hands. "I wish to heaven that you had
been first!" she sobbed.

McMurdo was down on his knees before her in an instant. "For God's sake,
Ettie, let it stand at that!" he cried. "Will you ruin your life and
my own for the sake of this promise? Follow your heart, acushla! 'Tis a
safer guide than any promise before you knew what it was that you were
saying."

He had seized Ettie's white hand between his own strong brown ones.

"Say that you will be mine, and we will face it out together!"

"Not here?"

"Yes, here."

"No, no, Jack!" His arms were round her now. "It could not be here.
Could you take me away?"

A struggle passed for a moment over McMurdo's face; but it ended by
setting like granite. "No, here," he said. "I'll hold you against the
world, Ettie, right here where we are!"

"Why should we not leave together?"

"No, Ettie, I can't leave here."

"But why?"

"I'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been driven out.
Besides, what is there to be afraid of? Are we not free folks in a free
country? If you love me, and I you, who will dare to come between?"

"You don't know, Jack. You've been here too short a time. You don't know
this Baldwin. You don't know McGinty and his Scowrers."

"No, I don't know them, and I don't fear them, and I don't believe
in them!" said McMurdo. "I've lived among rough men, my darling, and
instead of fearing them it has always ended that they have feared
me--always, Ettie. It's mad on the face of it! If these men, as your
father says, have done crime after crime in the valley, and if everyone
knows them by name, how comes it that none are brought to justice? You
answer me that, Ettie!"

"Because no witness dares to appear against them. He would not live a
month if he did. Also because they have always their own men to swear
that the accused one was far from the scene of the crime. But surely,
Jack, you must have read all this. I had understood that every paper in
the United States was writing about it."

"Well, I have read something, it is true; but I had thought it was a
story. Maybe these men have some reason in what they do. Maybe they are
wronged and have no other way to help themselves."

"Oh, Jack, don't let me hear you speak so! That is how he speaks--the
other one!"

"Baldwin--he speaks like that, does he?"

"And that is why I loathe him so. Oh, Jack, now I can tell you the
truth. I loathe him with all my heart; but I fear him also. I fear him
for myself; but above all I fear him for father. I know that some great
sorrow would come upon us if I dared to say what I really felt. That is
why I have put him off with half-promises. It was in real truth our only
hope. But if you would fly with me, Jack, we could take father with us
and live forever far from the power of these wicked men."

Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo's face, and again it set like
granite. "No harm shall come to you, Ettie--nor to your father either.
As to wicked men, I expect you may find that I am as bad as the worst of
them before we're through."

"No, no, Jack! I would trust you anywhere."

McMurdo laughed bitterly. "Good Lord! how little you know of me! Your
innocent soul, my darling, could not even guess what is passing in mine.
But, hullo, who's the visitor?"

The door had opened suddenly, and a young fellow came swaggering in with
the air of one who is the master. He was a handsome, dashing young
man of about the same age and build as McMurdo himself. Under his
broad-brimmed black felt hat, which he had not troubled to remove, a
handsome face with fierce, domineering eyes and a curved hawk-bill of a
nose looked savagely at the pair who sat by the stove.

Ettie had jumped to her feet full of confusion and alarm. "I'm glad to
see you, Mr. Baldwin," said she. "You're earlier than I had thought.
Come and sit down."

Baldwin stood with his hands on his hips looking at McMurdo. "Who is
this?" he asked curtly.

"It's a friend of mine, Mr. Baldwin, a new boarder here. Mr. McMurdo,
may I introduce you to Mr. Baldwin?"

The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other.

"Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?" said Baldwin.

"I didn't understand that there was any relation between you."

"Didn't you? Well, you can understand it now. You can take it from me
that this young lady is mine, and you'll find it a very fine evening for
a walk."

"Thank you, I am in no humour for a walk."

"Aren't you?" The man's savage eyes were blazing with anger. "Maybe you
are in a humour for a fight, Mr. Boarder!"

"That I am!" cried McMurdo, springing to his feet. "You never said a
more welcome word."

"For God's sake, Jack! Oh, for God's sake!" cried poor, distracted
Ettie. "Oh, Jack, Jack, he will hurt you!"

"Oh, it's Jack, is it?" said Baldwin with an oath. "You've come to that
already, have you?"

"Oh, Ted, be reasonable--be kind! For my sake, Ted, if ever you loved
me, be big-hearted and forgiving!"

"I think, Ettie, that if you were to leave us alone we could get this
thing settled," said McMurdo quietly. "Or maybe, Mr. Baldwin, you will
take a turn down the street with me. It's a fine evening, and there's
some open ground beyond the next block."

"I'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands," said his
enemy. "You'll wish you had never set foot in this house before I am
through with you!"

"No time like the present," cried McMurdo.

"I'll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to me. See
here!" He suddenly rolled up his sleeve and showed upon his forearm a
peculiar sign which appeared to have been branded there. It was a circle
with a triangle within it. "D'you know what that means?"

"I neither know nor care!"

"Well, you will know, I'll promise you that. You won't be much older,
either. Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something about it. As to you,
Ettie, you'll come back to me on your knees--d'ye hear, girl?--on
your knees--and then I'll tell you what your punishment may be. You've
sowed--and by the Lord, I'll see that you reap!" He glanced at them both
in fury. Then he turned upon his heel, and an instant later the outer
door had banged behind him.

For a few moments McMurdo and the girl stood in silence. Then she threw
her arms around him.

"Oh, Jack, how brave you were! But it is no use, you must fly!
To-night--Jack--to-night! It's your only hope. He will have your life.
I read it in his horrible eyes. What chance have you against a dozen of
them, with Boss McGinty and all the power of the lodge behind them?"

McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed her back
into a chair. "There, acushla, there! Don't be disturbed or fear for me.
I'm a Freeman myself. I'm after telling your father about it. Maybe I am
no better than the others; so don't make a saint of me. Perhaps you hate
me too, now that I've told you as much?"

"Hate you, Jack? While life lasts I could never do that! I've heard that
there is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but here; so why should
I think the worse of you for that? But if you are a Freeman, Jack, why
should you not go down and make a friend of Boss McGinty? Oh, hurry,
Jack, hurry! Get your word in first, or the hounds will be on your
trail."

"I was thinking the same thing," said McMurdo. "I'll go right now and
fix it. You can tell your father that I'll sleep here to-night and find
some other quarters in the morning."

The bar of McGinty's saloon was crowded as usual; for it was the
favourite loafing place of all the rougher elements of the town. The man
was popular; for he had a rough, jovial disposition which formed a
mask, covering a great deal which lay behind it. But apart from this
popularity, the fear in which he was held throughout the township, and
indeed down the whole thirty miles of the valley and past the mountains
on each side of it, was enough in itself to fill his bar; for none could
afford to neglect his good will.

Besides those secret powers which it was universally believed that he
exercised in so pitiless a fashion, he was a high public official, a
municipal councillor, and a commissioner of roads, elected to the
office through the votes of the ruffians who in turn expected to receive
favours at his hands. Assessments and taxes were enormous; the public
works were notoriously neglected, the accounts were slurred over by
bribed auditors, and the decent citizen was terrorized into paying
public blackmail, and holding his tongue lest some worse thing befall
him.

Thus it was that, year by year, Boss McGinty's diamond pins became more
obtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a more gorgeous vest, and
his saloon stretched farther and farther, until it threatened to absorb
one whole side of the Market Square.

McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his way
amid the crowd of men within, through an atmosphere blurred with tobacco
smoke and heavy with the smell of spirits. The place was brilliantly
lighted, and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon every wall reflected
and multiplied the garish illumination. There were several bartenders
in their shirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinks for the loungers who
fringed the broad, brass-trimmed counter.

At the far end, with his body resting upon the bar and a cigar stuck
at an acute angle from the corner of his mouth, stood a tall, strong,
heavily built man who could be none other than the famous McGinty
himself. He was a black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, and
with a shock of raven hair which fell to his collar. His complexion was
as swarthy as that of an Italian, and his eyes were of a strange dead
black, which, combined with a slight squint, gave them a particularly
sinister appearance.

All else in the man--his noble proportions, his fine features, and his
frank bearing--fitted in with that jovial, man-to-man manner which he
affected. Here, one would say, is a bluff, honest fellow, whose heart
would be sound however rude his outspoken words might seem. It was only
when those dead, dark eyes, deep and remorseless, were turned upon a man
that he shrank within himself, feeling that he was face to face with
an infinite possibility of latent evil, with a strength and courage and
