reached the deserted restaurant which forms the centre of summer gaiety.
Beside it was a bare flagstaff, and underneath it a man, his hat drawn
down and the collar of his overcoat turned up. When he turned his face
McMurdo saw that it was Brother Morris, he who had incurred the anger of
the Bodymaster the night before. The lodge sign was given and exchanged
as they met.

"I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo," said the older man,
speaking with a hesitation which showed that he was on delicate ground.
"It was kind of you to come."

"Why did you not put your name to the note?"

"One has to be cautious, mister. One never knows in times like these how
a thing may come back to one. One never knows either who to trust or who
not to trust."

"Surely one may trust brothers of the lodge."

"No, no, not always," cried Morris with vehemence. "Whatever we say,
even what we think, seems to go back to that man McGinty."

"Look here!" said McMurdo sternly. "It was only last night, as you know
well, that I swore good faith to our Bodymaster. Would you be asking me
to break my oath?"

"If that is the view you take," said Morris sadly, "I can only say that
I am sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me. Things have come
to a bad pass when two free citizens cannot speak their thoughts to each
other."

McMurdo, who had been watching his companion very narrowly, relaxed
somewhat in his bearing. "Sure I spoke for myself only," said he. "I am
a newcomer, as you know, and I am strange to it all. It is not for me to
open my mouth, Mr. Morris, and if you think well to say anything to me I
am here to hear it."

"And to take it back to Boss McGinty!" said Morris bitterly.

"Indeed, then, you do me injustice there," cried McMurdo. "For myself I
am loyal to the lodge, and so I tell you straight; but I would be a poor
creature if I were to repeat to any other what you might say to me in
confidence. It will go no further than me; though I warn you that you
may get neither help nor sympathy."

"I have given up looking for either the one or the other," said Morris.
"I may be putting my very life in your hands by what I say; but, bad as
you are--and it seemed to me last night that you were shaping to be as
bad as the worst--still you are new to it, and your conscience cannot
yet be as hardened as theirs. That was why I thought to speak with you."

"Well, what have you to say?"

"If you give me away, may a curse be on you!"

"Sure, I said I would not."

"I would ask you, then, when you joined the Freeman's society in Chicago
and swore vows of charity and fidelity, did ever it cross your mind that
you might find it would lead you to crime?"

"If you call it crime," McMurdo answered.

"Call it crime!" cried Morris, his voice vibrating with passion. "You
have seen little of it if you can call it anything else. Was it crime
last night when a man old enough to be your father was beaten till the
blood dripped from his white hairs? Was that crime--or what else would
you call it?"

"There are some would say it was war," said McMurdo, "a war of two
classes with all in, so that each struck as best it could."

"Well, did you think of such a thing when you joined the Freeman's
society at Chicago?"

"No, I'm bound to say I did not."

"Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia. It was just a benefit club
and a meeting place for one's fellows. Then I heard of this place--curse
the hour that the name first fell upon my ears!--and I came to better
myself! My God! to better myself! My wife and three children came with
me. I started a drygoods store on Market Square, and I prospered well.
The word had gone round that I was a Freeman, and I was forced to join
the local lodge, same as you did last night. I've the badge of shame on
my forearm and something worse branded on my heart. I found that I was
under the orders of a black villain and caught in a meshwork of crime.
What could I do? Every word I said to make things better was taken as
treason, same as it was last night. I can't get away; for all I have in
the world is in my store. If I leave the society, I know well that it
means murder to me, and God knows what to my wife and children. Oh, man,
it is awful--awful!" He put his hands to his face, and his body shook
with convulsive sobs.

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "You were too soft for the job," said
he. "You are the wrong sort for such work."

"I had a conscience and a religion; but they made me a criminal among
them. I was chosen for a job. If I backed down I knew well what would
come to me. Maybe I'm a coward. Maybe it's the thought of my poor little
woman and the children that makes me one. Anyhow I went. I guess it will
haunt me forever.

"It was a lonely house, twenty miles from here, over the range yonder.
I was told off for the door, same as you were last night. They could
not trust me with the job. The others went in. When they came out
their hands were crimson to the wrists. As we turned away a child was
screaming out of the house behind us. It was a boy of five who had seen
his father murdered. I nearly fainted with the horror of it, and yet I
had to keep a bold and smiling face; for well I knew that if I did not
it would be out of my house that they would come next with their bloody
hands and it would be my little Fred that would be screaming for his
father.

"But I was a criminal then, part sharer in a murder, lost forever in
this world, and lost also in the next. I am a good Catholic; but the
priest would have no word with me when he heard I was a Scowrer, and I
am excommunicated from my faith. That's how it stands with me. And I see
you going down the same road, and I ask you what the end is to be. Are
you ready to be a cold-blooded murderer also, or can we do anything to
stop it?"

"What would you do?" asked McMurdo abruptly. "You would not inform?"

"God forbid!" cried Morris. "Sure, the very thought would cost me my
life."

"That's well," said McMurdo. "I'm thinking that you are a weak man and
that you make too much of the matter."

"Too much! Wait till you have lived here longer. Look down the valley!
See the cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it! I tell you that
the cloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than that over the heads of
the people. It is the Valley of Fear, the Valley of Death. The terror is
in the hearts of the people from the dusk to the dawn. Wait, young man,
and you will learn for yourself."

"Well, I'll let you know what I think when I have seen more," said
McMurdo carelessly. "What is very clear is that you are not the man for
the place, and that the sooner you sell out--if you only get a dime a
dollar for what the business is worth--the better it will be for you.
What you have said is safe with me; but, by Gar! if I thought you were
an informer--"

"No, no!" cried Morris piteously.

"Well, let it rest at that. I'll bear what you have said in mind,
and maybe some day I'll come back to it. I expect you meant kindly by
speaking to me like this. Now I'll be getting home."

"One word before you go," said Morris. "We may have been seen together.
They may want to know what we have spoken about."

"Ah! that's well thought of."

"I offer you a clerkship in my store."

"And I refuse it. That's our business. Well, so long, Brother Morris,
and may you find things go better with you in the future."

That same afternoon, as McMurdo sat smoking, lost in thought beside the
stove of his sitting-room, the door swung open and its framework was
filled with the huge figure of Boss McGinty. He passed the sign, and
then seating himself opposite to the young man he looked at him steadily
for some time, a look which was as steadily returned.

"I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo," he said at last. "I guess
I am too busy over the folk that visit me. But I thought I'd stretch a
point and drop down to see you in your own house."

"I'm proud to see you here, Councillor," McMurdo answered heartily,
bringing his whisky bottle out of the cupboard. "It's an honour that I
had not expected."

"How's the arm?" asked the Boss.

McMurdo made a wry face. "Well, I'm not forgetting it," he said; "but
it's worth it."

"Yes, it's worth it," the other answered, "to those that are loyal and
go through with it and are a help to the lodge. What were you speaking
to Brother Morris about on Miller Hill this morning?"

The question came so suddenly that it was well that he had his answer
prepared. He burst into a hearty laugh. "Morris didn't know I could earn
a living here at home. He shan't know either; for he has got too much
conscience for the likes of me. But he's a good-hearted old chap. It was
his idea that I was at a loose end, and that he would do me a good turn
by offering me a clerkship in a drygoods store."

"Oh, that was it?"

"Yes, that was it."

"And you refused it?"

"Sure. Couldn't I earn ten times as much in my own bedroom with four
hours' work?"

"That's so. But I wouldn't get about too much with Morris."

"Why not?"

"Well, I guess because I tell you not. That's enough for most folk in
these parts."

"It may be enough for most folk; but it ain't enough for me,
Councillor," said McMurdo boldly. "If you are a judge of men, you'll
know that."

The swarthy giant glared at him, and his hairy paw closed for an instant
round the glass as though he would hurl it at the head of his companion.
Then he laughed in his loud, boisterous, insincere fashion.

"You're a queer card, for sure," said he. "Well, if you want reasons,
I'll give them. Did Morris say nothing to you against the lodge?"

"No."

"Nor against me?"

"No."

"Well, that's because he daren't trust you. But in his heart he is not
a loyal brother. We know that well. So we watch him and we wait for
the time to admonish him. I'm thinking that the time is drawing near.
There's no room for scabby sheep in our pen. But if you keep company
with a disloyal man, we might think that you were disloyal, too. See?"

"There's no chance of my keeping company with him; for I dislike the
man," McMurdo answered. "As to being disloyal, if it was any man but you
he would not use the word to me twice."

"Well, that's enough," said McGinty, draining off his glass. "I came
down to give you a word in season, and you've had it."

"I'd like to know," said McMurdo, "how you ever came to learn that I had
spoken with Morris at all?"

McGinty laughed. "It's my business to know what goes on in this
township," said he. "I guess you'd best reckon on my hearing all that
passes. Well, time's up, and I'll just say--"

But his leavetaking was cut short in a very unexpected fashion. With a
sudden crash the door flew open, and three frowning, intent faces glared
in at them from under the peaks of police caps. McMurdo sprang to his
feet and half drew his revolver; but his arm stopped midway as he became
conscious that two Winchester rifles were levelled at his head. A man
in uniform advanced into the room, a six-shooter in his hand. It was
Captain Marvin, once of Chicago, and now of the Mine Constabulary. He
shook his head with a half-smile at McMurdo.

"I thought you'd be getting into trouble, Mr. Crooked McMurdo of
Chicago," said he. "Can't keep out of it, can you? Take your hat and
come along with us."

"I guess you'll pay for this, Captain Marvin," said McGinty. "Who are
you, I'd like to know, to break into a house in this fashion and molest
honest, law-abiding men?"

"You're standing out in this deal, Councillor McGinty," said the police
captain. "We are not out after you, but after this man McMurdo. It is
for you to help, not to hinder us in our duty."

"He is a friend of mine, and I'll answer for his conduct," said the
Boss.

"By all accounts, Mr. McGinty, you may have to answer for your own
conduct some of these days," the captain answered. "This man McMurdo
was a crook before ever he came here, and he's a crook still. Cover him,
Patrolman, while I disarm him."

"There's my pistol," said McMurdo coolly. "Maybe, Captain Marvin, if you
and I were alone and face to face you would not take me so easily."

"Where's your warrant?" asked McGinty. "By Gar! a man might as well live
in Russia as in Vermissa while folk like you are running the police.
It's a capitalist outrage, and you'll hear more of it, I reckon."

"You do what you think is your duty the best way you can, Councillor.
We'll look after ours."

"What am I accused of?" asked McMurdo.

"Of being concerned in the beating of old Editor Stanger at the Herald
office. It wasn't your fault that it isn't a murder charge."

"Well, if that's all you have against him," cried McGinty with a laugh,
"you can save yourself a deal of trouble by dropping it right now. This
man was with me in my saloon playing poker up to midnight, and I can
bring a dozen to prove it."

"That's your affair, and I guess you can settle it in court to-morrow.
Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don't want a gun
across your head. You stand wide, Mr. McGinty; for I warn you I will
stand no resistance when I am on duty!"

So determined was the appearance of the captain that both McMurdo and
his boss were forced to accept the situation. The latter managed to have
a few whispered words with the prisoner before they parted.

"What about--" he jerked his thumb upward to signify the coining plant.

"All right," whispered McMurdo, who had devised a safe hiding place
under the floor.

"I'll bid you good-bye," said the Boss, shaking hands. "I'll see Reilly
the lawyer and take the defense upon myself. Take my word for it that
they won't be able to hold you."

"I wouldn't bet on that. Guard the prisoner, you two, and shoot him if
he tries any games. I'll search the house before I leave."

He did so; but apparently found no trace of the concealed plant. When he
had descended he and his men escorted McMurdo to headquarters. Darkness
had fallen, and a keen blizzard was blowing so that the streets were
nearly deserted; but a few loiterers followed the group, and emboldened
by invisibility shouted imprecations at the prisoner.

"Lynch the cursed Scowrer!" they cried. "Lynch him!" They laughed and
jeered as he was pushed into the police station. After a short, formal
examination from the inspector in charge he was put into the common
cell. Here he found Baldwin and three other criminals of the night
before, all arrested that afternoon and waiting their trial next
morning.

But even within this inner fortress of the law the long arm of the
Freemen was able to extend. Late at night there came a jailer with a
straw bundle for their bedding, out of which he extracted two bottles of
whisky, some glasses, and a pack of cards. They spent a hilarious night,
without an anxious thought as to the ordeal of the morning.

Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. The magistrate could not
possibly, on the evidence, have held them for a higher court. On the one
hand the compositors and pressmen were forced to admit that the light
was uncertain, that they were themselves much perturbed, and that it was
difficult for them to swear to the identity of the assailants; although
they believed that the accused were among them. Cross examined by the
clever attorney who had been engaged by McGinty, they were even more
nebulous in their evidence.

The injured man had already deposed that he was so taken by surprise by
the suddenness of the attack that he could state nothing beyond the fact
that the first man who struck him wore a moustache. He added that he
knew them to be Scowrers, since no one else in the community could
possibly have any enmity to him, and he had long been threatened on
account of his outspoken editorials. On the other hand, it was clearly
shown by the united and unfaltering evidence of six citizens, including
that high municipal official, Councillor McGinty, that the men had been
at a card party at the Union House until an hour very much later than
the commission of the outrage.

Needless to say that they were discharged with something very near to an
apology from the bench for the inconvenience to which they had been put,
together with an implied censure of Captain Marvin and the police for
their officious zeal.

The verdict was greeted with loud applause by a court in which McMurdo
saw many familiar faces. Brothers of the lodge smiled and waved. But
there were others who sat with compressed lips and brooding eyes as the
men filed out of the dock. One of them, a little, dark-bearded, resolute
fellow, put the thoughts of himself and comrades into words as the
ex-prisoners passed him.

"You damned murderers!" he said. "We'll fix you yet!"




Chapter 5--The Darkest Hour



If anything had been needed to give an impetus to Jack McMurdo's
popularity among his fellows it would have been his arrest and
acquittal. That a man on the very night of joining the lodge should have
done something which brought him before the magistrate was a new record
in the annals of the society. Already he had earned the reputation of a
good boon companion, a cheery reveller, and withal a man of high temper,
who would not take an insult even from the all-powerful Boss himself.
But in addition to this he impressed his comrades with the idea that
among them all there was not one whose brain was so ready to devise a
bloodthirsty scheme, or whose hand would be more capable of carrying
it out. "He'll be the boy for the clean job," said the oldsters to one
another, and waited their time until they could set him to his work.

McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized that this was
a supremely able one. He felt like a man holding a fierce bloodhound
in leash. There were curs to do the smaller work; but some day he
would slip this creature upon its prey. A few members of the lodge, Ted
Baldwin among them, resented the rapid rise of the stranger and hated
him for it; but they kept clear of him, for he was as ready to fight as
to laugh.

But if he gained favour with his fellows, there was another quarter,
one which had become even more vital to him, in which he lost it. Ettie
Shafter's father would have nothing more to do with him, nor would he
allow him to enter the house. Ettie herself was too deeply in love to
give him up altogether, and yet her own good sense warned her of what
would come from a marriage with a man who was regarded as a criminal.

One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him, possibly
for the last time, and make one strong endeavour to draw him from those
evil influences which were sucking him down. She went to his house, as
he had often begged her to do, and made her way into the room which he
used as his sitting-room. He was seated at a table, with his back turned
and a letter in front of him. A sudden spirit of girlish mischief came
over her--she was still only nineteen. He had not heard her when she
pushed open the door. Now she tiptoed forward and laid her hand lightly
upon his bended shoulders.

If she had expected to startle him, she certainly succeeded; but only in
turn to be startled herself. With a tiger spring he turned on her, and
his right hand was feeling for her throat. At the same instant with the
other hand he crumpled up the paper that lay before him. For an instant
he stood glaring. Then astonishment and joy took the place of the
ferocity which had convulsed his features--a ferocity which had sent
her shrinking back in horror as from something which had never before
intruded into her gentle life.

"It's you!" said he, mopping his brow. "And to think that you should
come to me, heart of my heart, and I should find nothing better to do
than to want to strangle you! Come then, darling," and he held out his
arms, "let me make it up to you."

But she had not recovered from that sudden glimpse of guilty fear which
she had read in the man's face. All her woman's instinct told her that
it was not the mere fright of a man who is startled. Guilt--that was
it--guilt and fear!

"What's come over you, Jack?" she cried. "Why were you so scared of me?
Oh, Jack, if your conscience was at ease, you would not have looked at
me like that!"

"Sure, I was thinking of other things, and when you came tripping so
lightly on those fairy feet of yours--"

"No, no, it was more than that, Jack." Then a sudden suspicion seized
her. "Let me see that letter you were writing."

"Ah, Ettie, I couldn't do that."

Her suspicions became certainties. "It's to another woman," she cried.
"I know it! Why else should you hold it from me? Was it to your wife
that you were writing? How am I to know that you are not a married
man--you, a stranger, that nobody knows?"

"I am not married, Ettie. See now, I swear it! You're the only one woman
on earth to me. By the cross of Christ I swear it!"

He was so white with passionate earnestness that she could not but
believe him.

"Well, then," she cried, "why will you not show me the letter?"

"I'll tell you, acushla," said he. "I'm under oath not to show it, and
just as I wouldn't break my word to you so I would keep it to those who
hold my promise. It's the business of the lodge, and even to you it's
secret. And if I was scared when a hand fell on me, can't you understand
it when it might have been the hand of a detective?"

She felt that he was telling the truth. He gathered her into his arms
and kissed away her fears and doubts.

"Sit here by me, then. It's a queer throne for such a queen; but it's
the best your poor lover can find. He'll do better for you some of these
days, I'm thinking. Now your mind is easy once again, is it not?"

"How can it ever be at ease, Jack, when I know that you are a criminal
among criminals, when I never know the day that I may hear you are in
court for murder? 'McMurdo the Scowrer,' that's what one of our boarders
called you yesterday. It went through my heart like a knife."

"Sure, hard words break no bones."

"But they were true."

"Well, dear, it's not so bad as you think. We are but poor men that are
trying in our own way to get our rights."

Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. "Give it up, Jack! For my
sake, for God's sake, give it up! It was to ask you that I came here
to-day. Oh, Jack, see--I beg it of you on my bended knees! Kneeling here
before you I implore you to give it up!"

He raised her and soothed her with her head against his breast.

"Sure, my darlin', you don't know what it is you are asking. How could I
give it up when it would be to break my oath and to desert my comrades?
If you could see how things stand with me you could never ask it of me.
Besides, if I wanted to, how could I do it? You don't suppose that the
lodge would let a man go free with all its secrets?"

"I've thought of that, Jack. I've planned it all. Father has saved some
money. He is weary of this place where the fear of these people darkens
our lives. He is ready to go. We would fly together to Philadelphia or
New York, where we would be safe from them."

McMurdo laughed. "The lodge has a long arm. Do you think it could not
stretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?"

"Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany, where father
came from--anywhere to get away from this Valley of Fear!"

McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. "Sure, it is the second time I
have heard the valley so named," said he. "The shadow does indeed seem
to lie heavy on some of you."

"It darkens every moment of our lives. Do you suppose that Ted Baldwin
has ever forgiven us? If it were not that he fears you, what do you
suppose our chances would be? If you saw the look in those dark, hungry
eyes of his when they fall on me!"

"By Gar! I'd teach him better manners if I caught him at it! But see
here, little girl. I can't leave here. I can't--take that from me once
and for all. But if you will leave me to find my own way, I will try to
prepare a way of getting honourably out of it."

"There is no honour in such a matter."

"Well, well, it's just how you look at it. But if you'll give me six
months, I'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed to look
others in the face."

The girl laughed with joy. "Six months!" she cried. "Is it a promise?"

"Well, it may be seven or eight. But within a year at the furthest we
will leave the valley behind us."

It was the most that Ettie could obtain, and yet it was something. There
was this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the immediate future.
She returned to her father's house more light-hearted than she had ever
been since Jack McMurdo had come into her life.

It might be thought that as a member, all the doings of the society
would be told to him; but he was soon to discover that the organization
was wider and more complex than the simple lodge. Even Boss McGinty was
ignorant as to many things; for there was an official named the County
Delegate, living at Hobson's Patch farther down the line, who had power
over several different lodges which he wielded in a sudden and arbitrary
way. Only once did McMurdo see him, a sly, little gray-haired rat of a
man, with a slinking gait and a sidelong glance which was charged with
malice. Evans Pott was his name, and even the great Boss of Vermissa
felt towards him something of the repulsion and fear which the huge
Danton may have felt for the puny but dangerous Robespierre.

One day Scanlan, who was McMurdo's fellow boarder, received a note from
McGinty inclosing one from Evans Pott, which informed him that he was
sending over two good men, Lawler and Andrews, who had instructions
to act in the neighbourhood; though it was best for the cause that no
particulars as to their objects should be given. Would the Bodymaster
see to it that suitable arrangements be made for their lodgings and
comfort until the time for action should arrive? McGinty added that it
was impossible for anyone to remain secret at the Union House, and that,
therefore, he would be obliged if McMurdo and Scanlan would put the
strangers up for a few days in their boarding house.

The same evening the two men arrived, each carrying his gripsack. Lawler
was an elderly man, shrewd, silent, and self-contained, clad in an old
black frock coat, which with his soft felt hat and ragged, grizzled
beard gave him a general resemblance to an itinerant preacher. His
companion Andrews was little more than a boy, frank-faced and cheerful,
with the breezy manner of one who is out for a holiday and means to
enjoy every minute of it. Both men were total abstainers, and behaved
in all ways as exemplary members of the society, with the one simple
exception that they were assassins who had often proved themselves to
be most capable instruments for this association of murder. Lawler had
already carried out fourteen commissions of the kind, and Andrews three.

They were, as McMurdo found, quite ready to converse about their deeds
in the past, which they recounted with the half-bashful pride of men
who had done good and unselfish service for the community. They were
reticent, however, as to the immediate job in hand.

"They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink," Lawler
explained. "They can count on us saying no more than we should. You must
not take it amiss, but it is the orders of the County Delegate that we
obey."

"Sure, we are all in it together," said Scanlan, McMurdo's mate, as the
four sat together at supper.

"That's true enough, and we'll talk till the cows come home of the
killing of Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird, or any other job in the
past. But till the work is done we say nothing."

"There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to," said
McMurdo, with an oath. "I suppose it isn't Jack Knox of Ironhill that
you are after. I'd go some way to see him get his deserts."

"No, it's not him yet."

"Or Herman Strauss?"

"No, nor him either."

"Well, if you won't tell us we can't make you; but I'd be glad to know."

Lawler smiled and shook his head. He was not to be drawn.

In spite of the reticence of their guests, Scanlan and McMurdo were
quite determined to be present at what they called "the fun." When,
therefore, at an early hour one morning McMurdo heard them creeping down
the stairs he awakened Scanlan, and the two hurried on their clothes.
When they were dressed they found that the others had stolen out,
leaving the door open behind them. It was not yet dawn, and by the light
of the lamps they could see the two men some distance down the street.
They followed them warily, treading noiselessly in the deep snow.

The boarding house was near the edge of the town, and soon they were
at the crossroads which is beyond its boundary. Here three men were
waiting, with whom Lawler and Andrews held a short, eager conversation.
Then they all moved on together. It was clearly some notable job which
needed numbers. At this point there are several trails which lead to
various mines. The strangers took that which led to the Crow Hill, a
huge business which was in strong hands which had been able, thanks to
their energetic and fearless New England manager, Josiah H. Dunn, to
keep some order and discipline during the long reign of terror.

Day was breaking now, and a line of workmen were slowly making their
way, singly and in groups, along the blackened path.

McMurdo and Scanlan strolled on with the others, keeping in sight of the
men whom they followed. A thick mist lay over them, and from the heart
of it there came the sudden scream of a steam whistle. It was the
ten-minute signal before the cages descended and the day's labour began.

When they reached the open space round the mine shaft there were
a hundred miners waiting, stamping their feet and blowing on their
fingers; for it was bitterly cold. The strangers stood in a little group
under the shadow of the engine house. Scanlan and McMurdo climbed a heap
of slag from which the whole scene lay before them. They saw the mine
engineer, a great bearded Scotchman named Menzies, come out of the
engine house and blow his whistle for the cages to be lowered.

At the same instant a tall, loose-framed young man with a clean-shaved,
earnest face advanced eagerly towards the pit head. As he came forward
his eyes fell upon the group, silent and motionless, under the engine
house. The men had drawn down their hats and turned up their collars to
screen their faces. For a moment the presentiment of Death laid its cold
hand upon the manager's heart. At the next he had shaken it off and saw
only his duty towards intrusive strangers.

"Who are you?" he asked as he advanced. "What are you loitering there
for?"

There was no answer; but the lad Andrews stepped forward and shot him in
the stomach. The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless and helpless
as if they were paralyzed. The manager clapped his two hands to the
wound and doubled himself up. Then he staggered away; but another of the
assassins fired, and he went down sidewise, kicking and clawing among
a heap of clinkers. Menzies, the Scotchman, gave a roar of rage at the
sight and rushed with an iron spanner at the murderers; but was met by
two balls in the face which dropped him dead at their very feet.

There was a surge forward of some of the miners, and an inarticulate
cry of pity and of anger; but a couple of the strangers emptied their
six-shooters over the heads of the crowd, and they broke and scattered,
some of them rushing wildly back to their homes in Vermissa.

When a few of the bravest had rallied, and there was a return to the
mine, the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of morning, without
a single witness being able to swear to the identity of these men who in
front of a hundred spectators had wrought this double crime.

Scanlan and McMurdo made their way back; Scanlan somewhat subdued, for
it was the first murder job that he had seen with his own eyes, and
it appeared less funny than he had been led to believe. The horrible
screams of the dead manager's wife pursued them as they hurried to the
town. McMurdo was absorbed and silent; but he showed no sympathy for the
weakening of his companion.

"Sure, it is like a war," he repeated. "What is it but a war between us
and them, and we hit back where we best can."

There was high revel in the lodge room at the Union House that night,
not only over the killing of the manager and engineer of the Crow Hill
mine, which would bring this organization into line with the other
blackmailed and terror-stricken companies of the district, but also
over a distant triumph which had been wrought by the hands of the lodge
itself.

It would appear that when the County Delegate had sent over five good
men to strike a blow in Vermissa, he had demanded that in return three
Vermissa men should be secretly selected and sent across to kill William
Hales of Stake Royal, one of the best known and most popular mine owners
in the Gilmerton district, a man who was believed not to have an enemy
in the world; for he was in all ways a model employer. He had insisted,
however, upon efficiency in the work, and had, therefore, paid off
certain drunken and idle employees who were members of the all-powerful
society. Coffin notices hung outside his door had not weakened his
resolution, and so in a free, civilized country he found himself
condemned to death.

The execution had now been duly carried out. Ted Baldwin, who sprawled
now in the seat of honour beside the Bodymaster, had been chief of the
party. His flushed face and glazed, bloodshot eyes told of sleeplessness
and drink. He and his two comrades had spent the night before among
the mountains. They were unkempt and weather-stained. But no heroes,
returning from a forlorn hope, could have had a warmer welcome from
their comrades.

The story was told and retold amid cries of delight and shouts of
laughter. They had waited for their man as he drove home at nightfall,
taking their station at the top of a steep hill, where his horse must be
at a walk. He was so furred to keep out the cold that he could not lay
his hand on his pistol. They had pulled him out and shot him again and
again. He had screamed for mercy. The screams were repeated for the
amusement of the lodge.

"Let's hear again how he squealed," they cried.

None of them knew the man; but there is eternal drama in a killing, and
they had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the Vermissa men were to
be relied upon.

There had been one contretemps; for a man and his wife had driven up
while they were still emptying their revolvers into the silent body.
It had been suggested that they should shoot them both; but they were
harmless folk who were not connected with the mines, so they were
sternly bidden to drive on and keep silent, lest a worse thing befall
them. And so the blood-mottled figure had been left as a warning to all
such hard-hearted employers, and the three noble avengers had hurried
off into the mountains where unbroken nature comes down to the very
edge of the furnaces and the slag heaps. Here they were, safe and sound,
their work well done, and the plaudits of their companions in their
ears.

It had been a great day for the Scowrers. The shadow had fallen even
darker over the valley. But as the wise general chooses the moment of
victory in which to redouble his efforts, so that his foes may have no
time to steady themselves after disaster, so Boss McGinty, looking out
upon the scene of his operations with his brooding and malicious eyes,
had devised a new attack upon those who opposed him. That very night, as
the half-drunken company broke up, he touched McMurdo on the arm and led
him aside into that inner room where they had their first interview.

"See here, my lad," said he, "I've got a job that's worthy of you at
last. You'll have the doing of it in your own hands."

"Proud I am to hear it," McMurdo answered.

"You can take two men with you--Manders and Reilly. They have been
warned for service. We'll never be right in this district until Chester
Wilcox has been settled, and you'll have the thanks of every lodge in
the coal fields if you can down him."

"I'll do my best, anyhow. Who is he, and where shall I find him?"

McGinty took his eternal half-chewed, half-smoked cigar from the corner
of his mouth, and proceeded to draw a rough diagram on a page torn from
his notebook.

"He's the chief foreman of the Iron Dike Company. He's a hard citizen,
an old colour sergeant of the war, all scars and grizzle. We've had two
tries at him; but had no luck, and Jim Carnaway lost his life over it.
Now it's for you to take it over. That's the house--all alone at the
Iron Dike crossroad, same as you see here on the map--without another
within earshot. It's no good by day. He's armed and shoots quick and
straight, with no questions asked. But at night--well, there he is with
his wife, three children, and a hired help. You can't pick or choose.
It's all or none. If you could get a bag of blasting powder at the front
door with a slow match to it--"

"What's the man done?"

"Didn't I tell you he shot Jim Carnaway?"

"Why did he shoot him?"

"What in thunder has that to do with you? Carnaway was about his house
at night, and he shot him. That's enough for me and you. You've got to
settle the thing right."

"There's these two women and the children. Do they go up too?"

"They have to--else how can we get him?"

"It seems hard on them; for they've done nothing."

"What sort of fool's talk is this? Do you back out?"

"Easy, Councillor, easy! What have I ever said or done that you should
think I would be after standing back from an order of the Bodymaster of
my own lodge? If it's right or if it's wrong, it's for you to decide."

"You'll do it, then?"

"Of course I will do it."

"When?"

"Well, you had best give me a night or two that I may see the house and
make my plans. Then--"

"Very good," said McGinty, shaking him by the hand. "I leave it with
you. It will be a great day when you bring us the news. It's just the
last stroke that will bring them all to their knees."

McMurdo thought long and deeply over the commission which had been so
suddenly placed in his hands. The isolated house in which Chester Wilcox
lived was about five miles off in an adjacent valley. That very night he
started off all alone to prepare for the attempt. It was daylight before
he returned from his reconnaissance. Next day he interviewed his two
subordinates, Manders and Reilly, reckless youngsters who were as elated
as if it were a deer-hunt.

Two nights later they met outside the town, all three armed, and one
of them carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which was used in the
quarries. It was two in the morning before they came to the lonely
house. The night was a windy one, with broken clouds drifting swiftly
across the face of a three-quarter moon. They had been warned to be on
their guard against bloodhounds; so they moved forward cautiously, with
their pistols cocked in their hands. But there was no sound save the
howling of the wind, and no movement but the swaying branches above
them.

McMurdo listened at the door of the lonely house; but all was still
within. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a hole in it
with his knife, and attached the fuse. When it was well alight he and
his two companions took to their heels, and were some distance off,
safe and snug in a sheltering ditch, before the shattering roar of the
explosion, with the low, deep rumble of the collapsing building, told
them that their work was done. No cleaner job had ever been carried out
in the bloodstained annals of the society.

But alas that work so well organized and boldly carried out should all
have gone for nothing! Warned by the fate of the various victims, and
knowing that he was marked down for destruction, Chester Wilcox had
moved himself and his family only the day before to some safer and less
known quarters, where a guard of police should watch over them. It was
an empty house which had been torn down by the gunpowder, and the grim
old colour sergeant of the war was still teaching discipline to the
miners of Iron Dike.

"Leave him to me," said McMurdo. "He's my man, and I'll get him sure if
I have to wait a year for him."

A vote of thanks and confidence was passed in full lodge, and so for
the time the matter ended. When a few weeks later it was reported in the
papers that Wilcox had been shot at from an ambuscade, it was an open
secret that McMurdo was still at work upon his unfinished job.

Such were the methods of the Society of Freemen, and such were the deeds
of the Scowrers by which they spread their rule of fear over the great
and rich district which was for so long a period haunted by their
terrible presence. Why should these pages be stained by further crimes?
Have I not said enough to show the men and their methods?

These deeds are written in history, and there are records wherein one
may read the details of them. There one may learn of the shooting of
Policemen Hunt and Evans because they had ventured to arrest two members
of the society--a double outrage planned at the Vermissa lodge and
carried out in cold blood upon two helpless and disarmed men. There also
one may read of the shooting of Mrs. Larbey when she was nursing her
husband, who had been beaten almost to death by orders of Boss McGinty.
The killing of the elder Jenkins, shortly followed by that of his
brother, the mutilation of James Murdoch, the blowing up of the
Staphouse family, and the murder of the Stendals all followed hard upon
one another in the same terrible winter.

Darkly the shadow lay upon the Valley of Fear. The spring had come with
running brooks and blossoming trees. There was hope for all Nature bound
so long in an iron grip; but nowhere was there any hope for the men and
women who lived under the yoke of the terror. Never had the cloud above
them been so dark and hopeless as in the early summer of the year 1875.




Chapter 6--Danger



It was the height of the reign of terror. McMurdo, who had already
been appointed Inner Deacon, with every prospect of some day succeeding
McGinty as Bodymaster, was now so necessary to the councils of his
comrades that nothing was done without his help and advice. The more
popular he became, however, with the Freemen, the blacker were the
scowls which greeted him as he passed along the streets of Vermissa. In
spite of their terror the citizens were taking heart to band themselves
together against their oppressors. Rumours had reached the lodge of
secret gatherings in the Herald office and of distribution of firearms
among the law-abiding people. But McGinty and his men were undisturbed
by such reports. They were numerous, resolute, and well armed. Their
opponents were scattered and powerless. It would all end, as it had done
in the past, in aimless talk and possibly in impotent arrests. So said
McGinty, McMurdo, and all the bolder spirits.

It was a Saturday evening in May. Saturday was always the lodge night,
and McMurdo was leaving his house to attend it when Morris, the weaker
brother of the order, came to see him. His brow was creased with care,
and his kindly face was drawn and haggard.

"Can I speak with you freely, Mr. McMurdo?"

"Sure."

"I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you kept it
to yourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask you about it."

"What else could I do if you trusted me? It wasn't that I agreed with
what you said."

"I know that well. But you are the one that I can speak to and be safe.
I've a secret here," he put his hand to his breast, "and it is just
burning the life out of me. I wish it had come to any one of you but me.
If I tell it, it will mean murder, for sure. If I don't, it may bring
the end of us all. God help me, but I am near out of my wits over it!"

McMurdo looked at the man earnestly. He was trembling in every limb. He
poured some whisky into a glass and handed it to him. "That's the physic
for the likes of you," said he. "Now let me hear of it."

Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. "I can tell
it to you all in one sentence," said he. "There's a detective on our
trail."

McMurdo stared at him in astonishment. "Why, man, you're crazy," he
said. "Isn't the place full of police and detectives and what harm did
they ever do us?"

"No, no, it's no man of the district. As you say, we know them, and it
is little that they can do. But you've heard of Pinkerton's?"

"I've read of some folk of that name."

"Well, you can take it from me you've no show when they are on your
trail. It's not a take-it-or-miss-it government concern. It's a dead
earnest business proposition that's out for results and keeps out
till by hook or crook it gets them. If a Pinkerton man is deep in this
business, we are all destroyed."

"We must kill him."

"Ah, it's the first thought that came to you! So it will be up at the
lodge. Didn't I say to you that it would end in murder?"

"Sure, what is murder? Isn't it common enough in these parts?"

"It is, indeed; but it's not for me to point out the man that is to be
murdered. I'd never rest easy again. And yet it's our own necks that may
be at stake. In God's name what shall I do?" He rocked to and fro in his
agony of indecision.

But his words had moved McMurdo deeply. It was easy to see that he
shared the other's opinion as to the danger, and the need for meeting
it. He gripped Morris's shoulder and shook him in his earnestness.

"See here, man," he cried, and he almost screeched the words in his
excitement, "you won't gain anything by sitting keening like an old wife
at a wake. Let's have the facts. Who is the fellow? Where is he? How did
you hear of him? Why did you come to me?"

"I came to you; for you are the one man that would advise me. I told you
that I had a store in the East before I came here. I left good friends
behind me, and one of them is in the telegraph service. Here's a letter
that I had from him yesterday. It's this part from the top of the page.
You can read it yourself."

This was what McMurdo read:

How are the Scowrers getting on in your parts? We read plenty of them
in the papers. Between you and me I expect to hear news from you before
long. Five big corporations and the two railroads have taken the thing
up in dead earnest. They mean it, and you can bet they'll get there!
They are right deep down into it. Pinkerton has taken hold under their
orders, and his best man, Birdy Edwards, is operating. The thing has got
to be stopped right now.

"Now read the postscript."

Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business; so it goes no
further. It's a queer cipher that you handle by the yard every day and
can get no meaning from.

McMurdo sat in silence for some time, with the letter in his listless
hands. The mist had lifted for a moment, and there was the abyss before
him.

"Does anyone else know of this?" he asked.

"I have told no one else."

"But this man--your friend--has he any other person that he would be
likely to write to?"

"Well, I dare say he knows one or two more."

"Of the lodge?"

"It's likely enough."

"I was asking because it is likely that he may have given some
description of this fellow Birdy Edwards--then we could get on his
trail."

"Well, it's possible. But I should not think he knew him. He is just
telling me the news that came to him by way of business. How would he
know this Pinkerton man?"

