"I am about to show you the jewel of my collection," said he. "There is
only one other specimen in Europe, now that the Rotterdam cub is dead.
It is a Brazilian cat."

"But how does that differ from any other cat?"

"You will soon see that," said he, laughing.  "Will you kindly draw
that shutter and look through?"

I did so, and found that I was gazing into a large, empty room, with
stone flags, and small, barred windows upon the farther wall. In the
centre of this room, lying in the middle of a golden patch of sunlight,
there was stretched a huge creature, as large as a tiger, but as black
and sleek as ebony.  It was simply a very enormous and very well-kept
black cat, and it cuddled up and basked in that yellow pool of light
exactly as a cat would do.  It was so graceful, so sinewy, and so
gently and smoothly diabolical, that I could not take my eyes from the
opening.

"Isn't he splendid?" said my host, enthusiastically.

"Glorious!  I never saw such a noble creature."

"Some people call it a black puma, but really it is not a puma at all.
That fellow is nearly eleven feet from tail to tip.  Four years ago he
was a little ball of black fluff, with two yellow eyes staring out of
it.  He was sold me as a new-born cub up in the wild country at the
head-waters of the Rio Negro.  They speared his mother to death after
she had killed a dozen of them."

"They are ferocious, then?"

"The most absolutely treacherous and bloodthirsty creatures upon earth.
You talk about a Brazilian cat to an up-country Indian, and see him get
the jumps.  They prefer humans to game. This fellow has never tasted
living blood yet, but when he does he will be a terror.  At present he
won't stand anyone but me in his den.  Even Baldwin, the groom, dare
not go near him.  As to me, I am his mother and father in one."

As he spoke he suddenly, to my astonishment, opened the door and
slipped in, closing it instantly behind him.  At the sound of his voice
the huge, lithe creature rose, yawned and rubbed its round, black head
affectionately against his side, while he patted and fondled it.

"Now, Tommy, into your cage!" said he.

The monstrous cat walked over to one side of the room and coiled itself
up under a grating.  Everard King came out, and taking the iron handle
which I have mentioned, he began to turn it. As he did so the line of
bars in the corridor began to pass through a slot in the wall and
closed up the front of this grating, so as to make an effective cage.
When it was in position he opened the door once more and invited me
into the room, which was heavy with the pungent, musty smell peculiar
to the great carnivora.

"That's how we work it," said he.  "We give him the run of the room for
exercise, and then at night we put him in his cage.  You can let him
out by turning the handle from the passage, or you can, as you have
seen, coop him up in the same way.  No, no, you should not do that!"

I had put my hand between the bars to pat the glossy, heaving flank.
He pulled it back, with a serious face.

"I assure you that he is not safe.  Don't imagine that because I can
take liberties with him anyone else can.  He is very exclusive in his
friends--aren't you, Tommy?  Ah, he hears his lunch coming to him!
Don't you, boy?"

A step sounded in the stone-flagged passage, and the creature had
sprung to his feet, and was pacing up and down the narrow cage, his
yellow eyes gleaming, and his scarlet tongue rippling and quivering
over the white line of his jagged teeth.  A groom entered with a coarse
joint upon a tray, and thrust it through the bars to him.  He pounced
lightly upon it, carried it off to the corner, and there, holding it
between his paws, tore and wrenched at it, raising his bloody muzzle
every now and then to look at us.  It was a malignant and yet
fascinating sight.

"You can't wonder that I am fond of him, can you?" said my host, as we
left the room, "especially when you consider that I have had the
rearing of him.  It was no joke bringing him over from the centre of
South America; but here he is safe and sound--and, as I have said, far
the most perfect specimen in Europe.  The people at the Zoo are dying
to have him, but I really can't part with him. Now, I think that I have
inflicted my hobby upon you long enough, so we cannot do better than
follow Tommy's example, and go to our lunch."

My South American relative was so engrossed by his grounds and their
curious occupants, that I hardly gave him credit at first for having
any interests outside them.  That he had some, and pressing ones, was
soon borne in upon me by the number of telegrams which he received.
They arrived at all hours, and were always opened by him with the
utmost eagerness and anxiety upon his face.  Sometimes I imagined that
it must be the Turf, and sometimes the Stock Exchange, but certainly he
had some very urgent business going forwards which was not transacted
upon the Downs of Suffolk. During the six days of my visit he had never
fewer than three or four telegrams a day, and sometimes as many as
seven or eight.

I had occupied these six days so well, that by the end of them I had
succeeded in getting upon the most cordial terms with my cousin.  Every
night we had sat up late in the billiard-room, he telling me the most
extraordinary stories of his adventures in America--stories so
desperate and reckless, that I could hardly associate them with the
brown little, chubby man before me.  In return, I ventured upon some of
my own reminiscences of London life, which interested him so much, that
he vowed he would come up to Grosvenor Mansions and stay with me.  He
was anxious to see the faster side of city life, and certainly, though
I say it, he could not have chosen a more competent guide.  It was not
until the last day of my visit that I ventured to approach that which
was on my mind.  I told him frankly about my pecuniary difficulties and
my impending ruin, and I asked his advice--though I hoped for something
more solid.  He listened attentively, puffing hard at his cigar.

"But surely," said he, "you are the heir of our relative, Lord
Southerton?"

"I have every reason to believe so, but he would never make me any
allowance."

"No, no, I have heard of his miserly ways.  My poor Marshall, your
position has been a very hard one.  By the way, have you heard any news
of Lord Southerton's health lately?"

"He has always been in a critical condition ever since my childhood."

"Exactly--a creaking hinge, if ever there was one.  Your inheritance
may be a long way off.  Dear me, how awkwardly situated you are!"

"I had some hopes, sir, that you, knowing all the facts, might be
inclined to advance----"

"Don't say another word, my dear boy," he cried, with the utmost
cordiality; "we shall talk it over tonight, and I give you my word that
whatever is in my power shall be done."

I was not sorry that my visit was drawing to a close, for it is
unpleasant to feel that there is one person in the house who eagerly
desires your departure.  Mrs. King's sallow face and forbidding eyes
had become more and more hateful to me.  She was no longer actively
rude--her fear of her husband prevented her--but she pushed her insane
jealousy to the extent of ignoring me, never addressing me, and in
every way making my stay at Greylands as uncomfortable as she could.
So offensive was her manner during that last day, that I should
certainly have left had it not been for that interview with my host in
the evening which would, I hoped, retrieve my broken fortunes.

It was very late when it occurred, for my relative, who had been
receiving even more telegrams than usual during the day, went off to
his study after dinner, and only emerged when the household had retired
to bed.  I heard him go round locking the doors, as custom was of a
night, and finally he joined me in the billiard-room. His stout figure
was wrapped in a dressing-gown, and he wore a pair of red Turkish
slippers without any heels.  Settling down into an arm-chair, he brewed
himself a glass of grog, in which I could not help noticing that the
whisky considerably predominated over the water.

"My word!" said he, "what a night!"

It was, indeed.  The wind was howling and screaming round the house,
and the latticed windows rattled and shook as if they were coming in.
The glow of the yellow lamps and the flavour of our cigars seemed the
brighter and more fragrant for the contrast.

"Now, my boy," said my host, "we have the house and the night to
ourselves.  Let me have an idea of how your affairs stand, and I will
see what can be done to set them in order.  I wish to hear every
detail."

Thus encouraged, I entered into a long exposition, in which all my
tradesmen and creditors from my landlord to my valet, figured in turn.
I had notes in my pocket-book, and I marshalled my facts, and gave, I
flatter myself, a very businesslike statement of my own unbusinesslike
ways and lamentable position.  I was depressed, however, to notice that
my companion's eyes were vacant and his attention elsewhere.  When he
did occasionally throw out a remark it was so entirely perfunctory and
pointless, that I was sure he had not in the least followed my remarks.
Every now and then he roused himself and put on some show of interest,
asking me to repeat or to explain more fully, but it was always to sink
once more into the same brown study.  At last he rose and threw the end
of his cigar into the grate.

"I'll tell you what, my boy," said he.  "I never had a head for
figures, so you will excuse me.  You must jot it all down upon paper,
and let me have a note of the amount.  I'll understand it when I see it
in black and white."

The proposal was encouraging.  I promised to do so.

"And now it's time we were in bed.  By Jove, there's one o'clock
striking in the hall."

The tingling of the chiming clock broke through the deep roar of the
gale.  The wind was sweeping past with the rush of a great river.

"I must see my cat before I go to bed," said my host.  "A high wind
excites him.  Will you come?"

"Certainly," said I.

"Then tread softly and don't speak, for everyone is asleep."

We passed quietly down the lamp-lit Persian-rugged hall, and through
the door at the farther end.  All was dark in the stone corridor, but a
stable lantern hung on a hook, and my host took it down and lit it.
There was no grating visible in the passage, so I knew that the beast
was in its cage.

"Come in!" said my relative, and opened the door.

A deep growling as we entered showed that the storm had really excited
the creature.  In the flickering light of the lantern, we saw it, a
huge black mass coiled in the corner of its den and throwing a squat,
uncouth shadow upon the whitewashed wall.  Its tail switched angrily
among the straw.

"Poor Tommy is not in the best of tempers," said Everard King, holding
up the lantern and looking in at him.  "What a black devil he looks,
doesn't he?  I must give him a little supper to put him in a better
humour.  Would you mind holding the lantern for a moment?"

I took it from his hand and he stepped to the door.

"His larder is just outside here," said he.  "You will excuse me for an
instant won't you?"  He passed out, and the door shut with a sharp
metallic click behind him.

That hard crisp sound made my heart stand still.  A sudden wave of
terror passed over me.  A vague perception of some monstrous treachery
turned me cold.  I sprang to the door, but there was no handle upon the
inner side.

"Here!" I cried.  "Let me out!"

"All right!  Don't make a row!" said my host from the passage. "You've
got the light all right."

"Yes, but I don't care about being locked in alone like this."

"Don't you?" I heard his hearty, chuckling laugh.  "You won't be alone
long."

"Let me out, sir!" I repeated angrily.  "I tell you I don't allow
practical jokes of this sort."

"Practical is the word," said he, with another hateful chuckle. And
then suddenly I heard, amidst the roar of the storm, the creak and
whine of the winch-handle turning and the rattle of the grating as it
passed through the slot.  Great God, he was letting loose the Brazilian
cat!

In the light of the lantern I saw the bars sliding slowly before me.
Already there was an opening a foot wide at the farther end.  With a
scream I seized the last bar with my hands and pulled with the strength
of a madman.  I WAS a madman with rage and horror.  For a minute or
more I held the thing motionless.  I knew that he was straining with
all his force upon the handle, and that the leverage was sure to
overcome me.  I gave inch by inch, my feet sliding along the stones,
and all the time I begged and prayed this inhuman monster to save me
from this horrible death.  I conjured him by his kinship.  I reminded
him that I was his guest; I begged to know what harm I had ever done
him.  His only answers were the tugs and jerks upon the handle, each of
which, in spite of all my struggles, pulled another bar through the
opening.  Clinging and clutching, I was dragged across the whole front
of the cage, until at last, with aching wrists and lacerated fingers, I
gave up the hopeless struggle.  The grating clanged back as I released
it, and an instant later I heard the shuffle of the Turkish slippers in
the passage, and the slam of the distant door.  Then everything was
silent.

The creature had never moved during this time.  He lay still in the
corner, and his tail had ceased switching.  This apparition of a man
adhering to his bars and dragged screaming across him had apparently
filled him with amazement.  I saw his great eyes staring steadily at
me.  I had dropped the lantern when I seized the bars, but it still
burned upon the floor, and I made a movement to grasp it, with some
idea that its light might protect me.  But the instant I moved, the
beast gave a deep and menacing growl.  I stopped and stood still,
quivering with fear in every limb.  The cat (if one may call so fearful
a creature by so homely a name) was not more than ten feet from me.
The eyes glimmered like two disks of phosphorus in the darkness.  They
appalled and yet fascinated me.  I could not take my own eyes from
them.  Nature plays strange tricks with us at such moments of
intensity, and those glimmering lights waxed and waned with a steady
rise and fall.  Sometimes they seemed to be tiny points of extreme
brilliancy--little electric sparks in the black obscurity--then they
would widen and widen until all that corner of the room was filled with
their shifting and sinister light.  And then suddenly they went out
altogether.

The beast had closed its eyes.  I do not know whether there may be any
truth in the old idea of the dominance of the human gaze, or whether
the huge cat was simply drowsy, but the fact remains that, far from
showing any symptom of attacking me, it simply rested its sleek, black
head upon its huge forepaws and seemed to sleep.  I stood, fearing to
move lest I should rouse it into malignant life once more.  But at
least I was able to think clearly now that the baleful eyes were off
me.  Here I was shut up for the night with the ferocious beast.  My own
instincts, to say nothing of the words of the plausible villain who
laid this trap for me, warned me that the animal was as savage as its
master.  How could I stave it off until morning?  The door was
hopeless, and so were the narrow, barred windows.  There was no shelter
anywhere in the bare, stone-flagged room.  To cry for assistance was
absurd.  I knew that this den was an outhouse, and that the corridor
which connected it with the house was at least a hundred feet long.
Besides, with the gale thundering outside, my cries were not likely to
be heard.  I had only my own courage and my own wits to trust to.

And then, with a fresh wave of horror, my eyes fell upon the lantern.
The candle had burned low, and was already beginning to gutter.  In ten
minutes it would be out.  I had only ten minutes then in which to do
something, for I felt that if I were once left in the dark with that
fearful beast I should be incapable of action.  The very thought of it
paralysed me.  I cast my despairing eyes round this chamber of death,
and they rested upon one spot which seemed to promise I will not say
safety, but less immediate and imminent danger than the open floor.

I have said that the cage had a top as well as a front, and this top
was left standing when the front was wound through the slot in the
wall.  It consisted of bars at a few inches' interval, with stout wire
netting between, and it rested upon a strong stanchion at each end.  It
stood now as a great barred canopy over the crouching figure in the
corner.  The space between this iron shelf and the roof may have been
from two or three feet.  If I could only get up there, squeezed in
between bars and ceiling, I should have only one vulnerable side.  I
should be safe from below, from behind, and from each side.  Only on
the open face of it could I be attacked.  There, it is true, I had no
protection whatever; but at least, I should be out of the brute's path
when he began to pace about his den.  He would have to come out of his
way to reach me.  It was now or never, for if once the light were out
it would be impossible.  With a gulp in my throat I sprang up, seized
the iron edge of the top, and swung myself panting on to it.  I writhed
in face downwards, and found myself looking straight into the terrible
eyes and yawning jaws of the cat.  Its fetid breath came up into my
face like the steam from some foul pot.

It appeared, however, to be rather curious than angry.  With a sleek
ripple of its long, black back it rose, stretched itself, and then
rearing itself on its hind legs, with one forepaw against the wall, it
raised the other, and drew its claws across the wire meshes beneath me.
One sharp, white hook tore through my trousers--for I may mention that
I was still in evening dress--and dug a furrow in my knee.  It was not
meant as an attack, but rather as an experiment, for upon my giving a
sharp cry of pain he dropped down again, and springing lightly into the
room, he began walking swiftly round it, looking up every now and again
in my direction. For my part I shuffled backwards until I lay with my
back against the wall, screwing myself into the smallest space
possible.  The farther I got the more difficult it was for him to
attack me.

He seemed more excited now that he had begun to move about, and he ran
swiftly and noiselessly round and round the den, passing continually
underneath the iron couch upon which I lay.  It was wonderful to see so
great a bulk passing like a shadow, with hardly the softest thudding of
velvety pads.  The candle was burning low--so low that I could hardly
see the creature.  And then, with a last flare and splutter it went out
altogether.  I was alone with the cat in the dark!

It helps one to face a danger when one knows that one has done all that
possibly can be done.  There is nothing for it then but to quietly
await the result.  In this case, there was no chance of safety anywhere
except the precise spot where I was.  I stretched myself out,
therefore, and lay silently, almost breathlessly, hoping that the beast
might forget my presence if I did nothing to remind him.  I reckoned
that it must already be two o'clock.  At four it would be full dawn.  I
had not more than two hours to wait for daylight.

Outside, the storm was still raging, and the rain lashed continually
against the little windows.  Inside, the poisonous and fetid air was
overpowering.  I could neither hear nor see the cat. I tried to think
about other things--but only one had power enough to draw my mind from
my terrible position.  That was the contemplation of my cousin's
villainy, his unparalleled hypocrisy, his malignant hatred of me.
Beneath that cheerful face there lurked the spirit of a mediaeval
assassin.  And as I thought of it I saw more clearly how cunningly the
thing had been arranged.  He had apparently gone to bed with the
others.  No doubt he had his witness to prove it.  Then, unknown to
them, he had slipped down, had lured me into his den and abandoned me.
His story would be so simple.  He had left me to finish my cigar in the
billiard-room. I had gone down on my own account to have a last look at
the cat. I had entered the room without observing that the cage was
opened, and I had been caught.  How could such a crime be brought home
to him?  Suspicion, perhaps--but proof, never!

How slowly those dreadful two hours went by!  Once I heard a low,
rasping sound, which I took to be the creature licking its own fur.
Several times those greenish eyes gleamed at me through the darkness,
but never in a fixed stare, and my hopes grew stronger that my presence
had been forgotten or ignored.  At last the least faint glimmer of
light came through the windows--I first dimly saw them as two grey
squares upon the black wall, then grey turned to white, and I could see
my terrible companion once more.  And he, alas, could see me!

It was evident to me at once that he was in a much more dangerous and
aggressive mood than when I had seen him last.  The cold of the morning
had irritated him, and he was hungry as well. With a continual growl he
paced swiftly up and down the side of the room which was farthest from
my refuge, his whiskers bristling angrily, and his tail switching and
lashing.  As he turned at the corners his savage eyes always looked
upwards at me with a dreadful menace.  I knew then that he meant to
kill me.  Yet I found myself even at that moment admiring the sinuous
grace of the devilish thing, its long, undulating, rippling movements,
the gloss of its beautiful flanks, the vivid, palpitating scarlet of
the glistening tongue which hung from the jet-black muzzle.  And all
the time that deep, threatening growl was rising and rising in an
unbroken crescendo.  I knew that the crisis was at hand.

It was a miserable hour to meet such a death--so cold, so comfortless,
shivering in my light dress clothes upon this gridiron of torment upon
which I was stretched.  I tried to brace myself to it, to raise my soul
above it, and at the same time, with the lucidity which comes to a
perfectly desperate man, I cast round for some possible means of
escape.  One thing was clear to me.  If that front of the cage was only
back in its position once more, I could find a sure refuge behind it.
Could I possibly pull it back?  I hardly dared to move for fear of
bringing the creature upon me. Slowly, very slowly, I put my hand
forward until it grasped the edge of the front, the final bar which
protruded through the wall. To my surprise it came quite easily to my
jerk.  Of course the difficulty of drawing it out arose from the fact
that I was clinging to it.  I pulled again, and three inches of it came
through.  It ran apparently on wheels.  I pulled again ... and then
the cat sprang!

It was so quick, so sudden, that I never saw it happen.  I simply heard
the savage snarl, and in an instant afterwards the blazing yellow eyes,
the flattened black head with its red tongue and flashing teeth, were
within reach of me.  The impact of the creature shook the bars upon
which I lay, until I thought (as far as I could think of anything at
such a moment) that they were coming down.  The cat swayed there for an
instant, the head and front paws quite close to me, the hind paws
clawing to find a grip upon the edge of the grating.  I heard the claws
rasping as they clung to the wire-netting, and the breath of the beast
made me sick.  But its bound had been miscalculated.  It could not
retain its position.  Slowly, grinning with rage, and scratching madly
at the bars, it swung backwards and dropped heavily upon the floor.
With a growl it instantly faced round to me and crouched for another
spring.

I knew that the next few moments would decide my fate.  The creature
had learned by experience.  It would not miscalculate again.  I must
act promptly, fearlessly, if I were to have a chance for life.  In an
instant I had formed my plan.  Pulling off my dress-coat, I threw it
down over the head of the beast.  At the same moment I dropped over the
edge, seized the end of the front grating, and pulled it frantically
out of the wall.

It came more easily than I could have expected.  I rushed across the
room, bearing it with me; but, as I rushed, the accident of my position
put me upon the outer side.  Had it been the other way, I might have
come off scathless.  As it was, there was a moment's pause as I stopped
it and tried to pass in through the opening which I had left.  That
moment was enough to give time to the creature to toss off the coat
with which I had blinded him and to spring upon me.  I hurled myself
through the gap and pulled the rails to behind me, but he seized my leg
before I could entirely withdraw it.  One stroke of that huge paw tore
off my calf as a shaving of wood curls off before a plane.  The next
moment, bleeding and fainting, I was lying among the foul straw with a
line of friendly bars between me and the creature which ramped so
frantically against them.

Too wounded to move, and too faint to be conscious of fear, I could
only lie, more dead than alive, and watch it.  It pressed its broad,
black chest against the bars and angled for me with its crooked paws as
I have seen a kitten do before a mouse-trap.  It ripped my clothes,
but, stretch as it would, it could not quite reach me.  I have heard of
the curious numbing effect produced by wounds from the great carnivora,
and now I was destined to experience it, for I had lost all sense of
personality, and was as interested in the cat's failure or success as
if it were some game which I was watching.  And then gradually my mind
drifted away into strange vague dreams, always with that black face and
red tongue coming back into them, and so I lost myself in the nirvana
of delirium, the blessed relief of those who are too sorely tried.

Tracing the course of events afterwards, I conclude that I must have
been insensible for about two hours.  What roused me to consciousness
once more was that sharp metallic click which had been the precursor of
my terrible experience.  It was the shooting back of the spring lock.
Then, before my senses were clear enough to entirely apprehend what
they saw, I was aware of the round, benevolent face of my cousin
peering in through the open door. What he saw evidently amazed him.
There was the cat crouching on the floor.  I was stretched upon my back
in my shirt-sleeves within the cage, my trousers torn to ribbons and a
great pool of blood all round me.  I can see his amazed face now, with
the morning sunlight upon it.  He peered at me, and peered again.  Then
he closed the door behind him, and advanced to the cage to see if I
were really dead.

I cannot undertake to say what happened.  I was not in a fit state to
witness or to chronicle such events.  I can only say that I was
suddenly conscious that his face was away from me--that he was looking
towards the animal.

"Good old Tommy!" he cried.  "Good old Tommy!"

Then he came near the bars, with his back still towards me.

"Down, you stupid beast!" he roared.  "Down, sir!  Don't you know your
master?"

Suddenly even in my bemuddled brain a remembrance came of those words
of his when he had said that the taste of blood would turn the cat into
a fiend.  My blood had done it, but he was to pay the price.

"Get away!" he screamed.  "Get away, you devil!  Baldwin! Baldwin!  Oh,
my God!"

And then I heard him fall, and rise, and fall again, with a sound like
the ripping of sacking.  His screams grew fainter until they were lost
in the worrying snarl.  And then, after I thought that he was dead, I
saw, as in a nightmare, a blinded, tattered, blood-soaked figure
running wildly round the room--and that was the last glimpse which I
had of him before I fainted once again.


I was many months in my recovery--in fact, I cannot say that I have
ever recovered, for to the end of my days I shall carry a stick as a
sign of my night with the Brazilian cat.  Baldwin, the groom, and the
other servants could not tell what had occurred, when, drawn by the
death-cries of their master, they found me behind the bars, and his
remains--or what they afterwards discovered to be his remains--in the
clutch of the creature which he had reared.  They stalled him off with
hot irons, and afterwards shot him through the loophole of the door
before they could finally extricate me.  I was carried to my bedroom,
and there, under the roof of my would-be murderer, I remained between
life and death for several weeks.  They had sent for a surgeon from
Clipton and a nurse from London, and in a month I was able to be
carried to the station, and so conveyed back once more to Grosvenor
Mansions.

I have one remembrance of that illness, which might have been part of
the ever-changing panorama conjured up by a delirious brain were it not
so definitely fixed in my memory.  One night, when the nurse was
absent, the door of my chamber opened, and a tall woman in blackest
mourning slipped into the room.  She came across to me, and as she bent
her sallow face I saw by the faint gleam of the night-light that it was
the Brazilian woman whom my cousin had married.  She stared intently
into my face, and her expression was more kindly than I had ever seen
it.

"Are you conscious?" she asked.

I feebly nodded--for I was still very weak.

"Well; then, I only wished to say to you that you have yourself to
blame.  Did I not do all I could for you?  From the beginning I tried
to drive you from the house.  By every means, short of betraying my
husband, I tried to save you from him.  I knew that he had a reason for
bringing you here.  I knew that he would never let you get away again.
No one knew him as I knew him, who had suffered from him so often.  I
did not dare to tell you all this. He would have killed me.  But I did
my best for you.  As things have turned out, you have been the best
friend that I have ever had.  You have set me free, and I fancied that
nothing but death would do that.  I am sorry if you are hurt, but I
cannot reproach myself.  I told you that you were a fool--and a fool
you have been."  She crept out of the room, the bitter, singular woman,
and I was never destined to see her again.  With what remained from her
husband's property she went back to her native land, and I have heard
that she afterwards took the veil at Pernambuco.

It was not until I had been back in London for some time that the
doctors pronounced me to be well enough to do business.  It was not a
very welcome permission to me, for I feared that it would be the signal
for an inrush of creditors; but it was Summers, my lawyer, who first
took advantage of it.

"I am very glad to see that your lordship is so much better," said he.
"I have been waiting a long time to offer my congratulations."

"What do you mean, Summers?  This is no time for joking."

"I mean what I say," he answered.  "You have been Lord Southerton for
the last six weeks, but we feared that it would retard your recovery if
you were to learn it."

Lord Southerton!  One of the richest peers in England!  I could not
believe my ears.  And then suddenly I thought of the time which had
elapsed, and how it coincided with my injuries.

"Then Lord Southerton must have died about the same time that I was
hurt?"

"His death occurred upon that very day."  Summers looked hard at me as
I spoke, and I am convinced--for he was a very shrewd fellow--that he
had guessed the true state of the case.  He paused for a moment as if
awaiting a confidence from me, but I could not see what was to be
gained by exposing such a family scandal.

"Yes, a very curious coincidence," he continued, with the same knowing
look.  "Of course, you are aware that your cousin Everard King was the
next heir to the estates.  Now, if it had been you instead of him who
had been torn to pieces by this tiger, or whatever it was, then of
course he would have been Lord Southerton at the present moment."

"No doubt," said I.

"And he took such an interest in it," said Summers.  "I happen to know
that the late Lord Southerton's valet was in his pay, and that he used
to have telegrams from him every few hours to tell him how he was
getting on.  That would be about the time when you were down there.
Was it not strange that he should wish to be so well informed, since he
knew that he was not the direct heir?"

"Very strange," said I.  "And now, Summers, if you will bring me my
bills and a new cheque-book, we will begin to get things into order."




Tales of Mystery



The Lost Special

The confession of Herbert de Lernac, now lying under sentence of death
at Marseilles, has thrown a light upon one of the most inexplicable
crimes of the century--an incident which is, I believe, absolutely
unprecedented in the criminal annals of any country: Although there is
a reluctance to discuss the matter in official circles, and little
information has been given to the Press, there are still indications
that the statement of this arch-criminal is corroborated by the facts,
and that we have at last found a solution for a most astounding
business.  As the matter is eight years old, and as its importance was
somewhat obscured by a political crisis which was engaging the public
attention at the time, it may be as well to state the facts as far as
we have been able to ascertain them.  They are collated from the
Liverpool papers of that date, from the proceedings at the inquest upon
John Slater, the engine-driver, and from the records of the London and
West Coast Railway Company, which have been courteously put at my
disposal.  Briefly, they are as follows:

On the 3rd of June, 1890, a gentleman, who gave his name as Monsieur
Louis Caratal, desired an interview with Mr. James Bland, the
superintendent of the London and West Coast Central Station in
Liverpool.  He was a small man, middle-aged and dark, with a stoop
which was so marked that it suggested some deformity of the spine. He
was accompanied by a friend, a man of imposing physique, whose
deferential manner and constant attention showed that his position was
one of dependence.  This friend or companion, whose name did not
transpire, was certainly a foreigner, and probably from his swarthy
complexion, either a Spaniard or a South American.  One peculiarity was
observed in him.  He carried in his left hand a small black, leather
dispatch box, and it was noticed by a sharp-eyed clerk in the Central
office that this box was fastened to his wrist by a strap.  No
importance was attached to the fact at the time, but subsequent events
endowed it with some significance. Monsieur Caratal was shown up to Mr.
Bland's office, while his companion remained outside.

Monsieur Caratal's business was quickly dispatched.  He had arrived
that afternoon from Central America.  Affairs of the utmost importance
demanded that he should be in Paris without the loss of an unnecessary
hour.  He had missed the London express.  A special must be provided.
Money was of no importance.  Time was everything.  If the company would
speed him on his way, they might make their own terms.

Mr. Bland struck the electric bell, summoned Mr. Potter Hood, the
traffic manager, and had the matter arranged in five minutes. The train
would start in three-quarters of an hour.  It would take that time to
insure that the line should be clear.  The powerful engine called
Rochdale (No. 247 on the company's register) was attached to two
carriages, with a guard's van behind.  The first carriage was solely
for the purpose of decreasing the inconvenience arising from the
oscillation.  The second was divided, as usual, into four compartments,
a first-class, a first-class smoking, a second-class, and a
second-class smoking.  The first compartment, which was nearest to the
engine, was the one allotted to the travellers.  The other three were
empty.  The guard of the special train was James McPherson, who had
been some years in the service of the company.  The stoker, William
Smith, was a new hand.

Monsieur Caratal, upon leaving the superintendent's office, rejoined
his companion, and both of them manifested extreme impatience to be
off.  Having paid the money asked, which amounted to fifty pounds five
shillings, at the usual special rate of five shillings a mile, they
demanded to be shown the carriage, and at once took their seats in it,
although they were assured that the better part of an hour must elapse
before the line could be cleared.  In the meantime a singular
coincidence had occurred in the office which Monsieur Caratal had just
quitted.

A request for a special is not a very uncommon circumstance in a rich
commercial centre, but that two should be required upon the same
afternoon was most unusual.  It so happened, however, that Mr. Bland
had hardly dismissed the first traveller before a second entered with a
similar request.  This was a Mr. Horace Moore, a gentlemanly man of
military appearance, who alleged that the sudden serious illness of his
wife in London made it absolutely imperative that he should not lose an
instant in starting upon the journey.  His distress and anxiety were so
evident that Mr. Bland did all that was possible to meet his wishes.  A
second special was out of the question, as the ordinary local service
was already somewhat deranged by the first.  There was the alternative,
however, that Mr. Moore should share the expense of Monsieur Caratal's
train, and should travel in the other empty first-class compartment, if
Monsieur Caratal objected to having him in the one which he occupied.
It was difficult to see any objection to such an arrangement, and yet
Monsieur Caratal, upon the suggestion being made to him by Mr. Potter
Hood, absolutely refused to consider it for an instant.  The train was
his, he said, and he would insist upon the exclusive use of it.  All
argument failed to overcome his ungracious objections, and finally the
plan had to be abandoned. Mr. Horace Moore left the station in great
distress, after learning that his only course was to take the ordinary
slow train which leaves Liverpool at six o'clock.  At four thirty-one
exactly by the station clock the special train, containing the crippled
Monsieur Caratal and his gigantic companion, steamed out of the
Liverpool station.  The line was at that time clear, and there should
have been no stoppage before Manchester.

The trains of the London and West Coast Railway run over the lines of
another company as far as this town, which should have been reached by
the special rather before six o'clock.  At a quarter after six
considerable surprise and some consternation were caused amongst the
officials at Liverpool by the receipt of a telegram from Manchester to
say that it had not yet arrived.  An inquiry directed to St. Helens,
which is a third of the way between the two cities, elicited the
following reply--


"To James Bland, Superintendent, Central L. & W. C.,
Liverpool.--Special passed here at 4:52, well up to time.--Dowster, St.
Helens."


This telegram was received at six-forty.  At six-fifty a second message
was received from Manchester--


"No sign of special as advised by you."


And then ten minutes later a third, more bewildering--


"Presume some mistake as to proposed running of special.  Local train
from St. Helens timed to follow it has just arrived and has seen
nothing of it.  Kindly wire advices.--Manchester."


The matter was assuming a most amazing aspect, although in some
respects the last telegram was a relief to the authorities at
Liverpool.  If an accident had occurred to the special, it seemed
hardly possible that the local train could have passed down the same
line without observing it.  And yet, what was the alternative? Where
could the train be?  Had it possibly been sidetracked for some reason
in order to allow the slower train to go past?  Such an explanation was
possible if some small repair had to be effected. A telegram was
dispatched to each of the stations between St. Helens and Manchester,
and the superintendent and traffic manager waited in the utmost
suspense at the instrument for the series of replies which would enable
them to say for certain what had become of the missing train.  The
answers came back in the order of questions, which was the order of the
stations beginning at the St. Helens end--

"Special passed here five o'clock.--Collins Green."

"Special passed here six past five.--Earlstown."

"Special passed here 5:10.--Newton."

"Special passed here 5:20.--Kenyon Junction."

"No special train has passed here.--Barton Moss."

The two officials stared at each other in amazement.

"This is unique in my thirty years of experience," said Mr. Bland.

"Absolutely unprecedented and inexplicable, sir.  The special has gone
wrong between Kenyon Junction and Barton Moss."

"And yet there is no siding, so far as my memory serves me, between the
two stations.  The special must have run off the metals."

"But how could the four-fifty parliamentary pass over the same line
without observing it?"

"There's no alternative, Mr. Hood.  It must be so. Possibly the local
train may have observed something which may throw some light upon the
matter.  We will wire to Manchester for more information, and to Kenyon
Junction with instructions that the line be examined instantly as far
as Barton Moss." The answer from Manchester came within a few minutes.

"No news of missing special.  Driver and guard of slow train positive
no accident between Kenyon Junction and Barton Moss. Line quite clear,
and no sign of anything unusual.--Manchester."

"That driver and guard will have to go," said Mr. Bland, grimly.
"There has been a wreck and they have missed it.  The special has
obviously run off the metals without disturbing the line--how it could
have done so passes my comprehension--but so it must be, and we shall
have a wire from Kenyon or Barton Moss presently to say that they have
found her at the bottom of an embankment."

But Mr. Bland's prophecy was not destined to be fulfilled. Half an hour
passed, and then there arrived the following message from the
station-master of Kenyon Junction--


"There are no traces of the missing special.  It is quite certain that
she passed here, and that she did not arrive at Barton Moss.  We have
detached engine from goods train, and I have myself ridden down the
line, but all is clear, and there is no sign of any accident."


Mr. Bland tore his hair in his perplexity.

"This is rank lunacy, Hood!" he cried.  "Does a train vanish into thin
air in England in broad daylight?  The thing is preposterous.  An
engine, a tender, two carriages, a van, five human beings--and all lost
on a straight line of railway!  Unless we get something positive within
the next hour I'll take Inspector Collins, and go down myself."

And then at last something positive did occur.  It took the shape of
another telegram from Kenyon Junction.

"Regret to report that the dead body of John Slater, driver of the
special train, has just been found among the gorse bushes at a point
two and a quarter miles from the Junction.  Had fallen from his engine,
pitched down the embankment, and rolled among the bushes.  Injuries to
his head, from the fall, appear to be cause of death.  Ground has now
been carefully examined, and there is no trace of the missing train."

The country was, as has already been stated, in the throes of a
political crisis, and the attention of the public was further
distracted by the important and sensational developments in Paris,
where a huge scandal threatened to destroy the Government and to wreck
the reputations of many of the leading men in France. The papers were
full of these events, and the singular disappearance of the special
train attracted less attention than would have been the case in more
peaceful times.  The grotesque nature of the event helped to detract
from its importance, for the papers were disinclined to believe the
facts as reported to them. More than one of the London journals treated
the matter as an ingenious hoax, until the coroner's inquest upon the
unfortunate driver (an inquest which elicited nothing of importance)
convinced them of the tragedy of the incident.

Mr. Bland, accompanied by Inspector Collins, the senior detective
officer in the service of the company, went down to Kenyon Junction the
same evening, and their research lasted throughout the following day,
but was attended with purely negative results.  Not only was no trace
found of the missing train, but no conjecture could be put forward
which could possibly explain the facts.  At the same time, Inspector
Collins's official report (which lies before me as I write) served to
show that the possibilities were more numerous than might have been
expected.

"In the stretch of railway between these two points," said he, "the
country is dotted with ironworks and collieries.  Of these, some are
being worked and some have been abandoned.  There are no fewer than
twelve which have small-gauge lines which run trolly-cars down to the
main line.  These can, of course, be disregarded. Besides these,
however, there are seven which have, or have had, proper lines running
down and connecting with points to the main line, so as to convey their
produce from the mouth of the mine to the great centres of
distribution.  In every case these lines are only a few miles in
length.  Out of the seven, four belong to collieries which are worked
out, or at least to shafts which are no longer used.  These are the
Redgauntlet, Hero, Slough of Despond, and Heartsease mines, the latter
having ten years ago been one of the principal mines in Lancashire.
These four side lines may be eliminated from our inquiry, for, to
prevent possible accidents, the rails nearest to the main line have
been taken up, and there is no longer any connection.  There remain
three other side lines leading--

  (a) To the Carnstock Iron Works;
  (b) To the Big Ben Colliery;
  (c) To the Perseverance Colliery.


"Of these the Big Ben line is not more than a quarter of a mile long,
and ends at a dead wall of coal waiting removal from the mouth of the
mine.  Nothing had been seen or heard there of any special.  The
Carnstock Iron Works line was blocked all day upon the 3rd of June by
sixteen truckloads of hematite.  It is a single line, and nothing could
have passed.  As to the Perseverance line, it is a large double line,
which does a considerable traffic, for the output of the mine is very
large.  On the 3rd of June this traffic proceeded as usual; hundreds of
men including a gang of railway platelayers were working along the two
miles and a quarter which constitute the total length of the line, and
it is inconceivable that an unexpected train could have come down there
without attracting universal attention.  It may be remarked in
conclusion that this branch line is nearer to St. Helens than the point
at which the engine-driver was discovered, so that we have every reason
to believe that the train was past that point before misfortune
overtook her.

"As to John Slater, there is no clue to be gathered from his appearance
or injuries.  We can only say that, so far as we can see, he met his
end by falling off his engine, though why he fell, or what became of
the engine after his fall, is a question upon which I do not feel
qualified to offer an opinion."  In conclusion, the inspector offered
his resignation to the Board, being much nettled by an accusation of
incompetence in the London papers.

A month elapsed, during which both the police and the company
prosecuted their inquiries without the slightest success.  A reward was
offered and a pardon promised in case of crime, but they were both
unclaimed.  Every day the public opened their papers with the
conviction that so grotesque a mystery would at last be solved, but
week after week passed by, and a solution remained as far off as ever.
In broad daylight, upon a June afternoon in the most thickly inhabited
portion of England, a train with its occupants had disappeared as
completely as if some master of subtle chemistry had volatilized it
into gas.  Indeed, among the various conjectures which were put forward
in the public Press, there were some which seriously asserted that
supernatural, or, at least, preternatural, agencies had been at work,
and that the deformed Monsieur Caratal was probably a person who was
better known under a less polite name.  Others fixed upon his swarthy
companion as being the author of the mischief, but what it was exactly
which he had done could never be clearly formulated in words.

Amongst the many suggestions put forward by various newspapers or
private individuals, there were one or two which were feasible enough
to attract the attention of the public.  One which appeared in The
Times, over the signature of an amateur reasoner of some celebrity at
that date, attempted to deal with the matter in a critical and
semi-scientific manner.  An extract must suffice, although the curious
can see the whole letter in the issue of the 3rd of July.

"It is one of the elementary principles of practical reasoning," he
remarked, "that when the impossible has been eliminated the residuum,
HOWEVER IMPROBABLE, must contain the truth.  It is certain that the
train left Kenyon Junction.  It is certain that it did not reach Barton
Moss.  It is in the highest degree unlikely, but still possible, that
it may have taken one of the seven available side lines.  It is
obviously impossible for a train to run where there are no rails, and,
therefore, we may reduce our improbables to the three open lines,
namely the Carnstock Iron Works, the Big Ben, and the Perseverance.  Is
there a secret society of colliers, an English Camorra, which is
capable of destroying both train and passengers?  It is improbable, but
it is not impossible.  I confess that I am unable to suggest any other
solution.  I should certainly advise the company to direct all their
energies towards the observation of those three lines, and of the
workmen at the end of them.  A careful supervision of the pawnbrokers'
shops of the district might possibly bring some suggestive facts to
light."

The suggestion coming from a recognized authority upon such matters
created considerable interest, and a fierce opposition from those who
considered such a statement to be a preposterous libel upon an honest
and deserving set of men.  The only answer to this criticism was a
challenge to the objectors to lay any more feasible explanations before
the public.  In reply to this two others were forthcoming (Times, July
7th and 9th).  The first suggested that the train might have run off
the metals and be lying submerged in the Lancashire and Staffordshire
Canal, which runs parallel to the railway for some hundred of yards.
This suggestion was thrown out of court by the published depth of the
canal, which was entirely insufficient to conceal so large an object.
The second correspondent wrote calling attention to the bag which
appeared to be the sole luggage which the travellers had brought with
them, and suggesting that some novel explosive of immense and
pulverizing power might have been concealed in it.  The obvious
absurdity, however, of supposing that the whole train might be blown to
dust while the metals remained uninjured reduced any such explanation
to a farce.  The investigation had drifted into this hopeless position
when a new and most unexpected incident occurred.

This was nothing less than the receipt by Mrs. McPherson of a letter
from her husband, James McPherson, who had been the guard on the
missing train.  The letter, which was dated July 5th, 1890, was posted
from New York and came to hand upon July 14th.  Some doubts were
expressed as to its genuine character but Mrs. McPherson was positive
as to the writing, and the fact that it contained a remittance of a
hundred dollars in five-dollar notes was enough in itself to discount
the idea of a hoax.  No address was given in the letter, which ran in
this way:


MY DEAR WIFE,--

"I have been thinking a great deal, and I find it very hard to give you
up.  The same with Lizzie.  I try to fight against it, but it will
always come back to me.  I send you some money which will change into
twenty English pounds.  This should be enough to bring both Lizzie and
you across the Atlantic, and you will find the Hamburg boats which stop
at Southampton very good boats, and cheaper than Liverpool.  If you
could come here and stop at the Johnston House I would try and send you
word how to meet, but things are very difficult with me at present, and
I am not very happy, finding it hard to give you both up.  So no more
at present, from your loving husband,

"James McPherson."


For a time it was confidently anticipated that this letter would lead
to the clearing up of the whole matter, the more so as it was
ascertained that a passenger who bore a close resemblance to the
missing guard had travelled from Southampton under the name of Summers
in the Hamburg and New York liner Vistula, which started upon the 7th
of June.  Mrs. McPherson and her sister Lizzie Dolton went across to
New York as directed and stayed for three weeks at the Johnston House,
without hearing anything from the missing man.  It is probable that
some injudicious comments in the Press may have warned him that the
police were using them as a bait.  However, this may be, it is certain
that he neither wrote nor came, and the women were eventually compelled
to return to Liverpool.

And so the matter stood, and has continued to stand up to the present
year of 1898.  Incredible as it may seem, nothing has transpired during
these eight years which has shed the least light upon the extraordinary
disappearance of the special train which contained Monsieur Caratal and
