in which the days would not seem too long, even without rioting; but
the maiden was lost, and the vision passed away, and then what was left
to them, especially when they had become too heavy for the hunt, or for
carrying a gun over the furrows, but to drink and get merry, or to
drink and get angry, so that they might be independent of variety, and
say over again with eager emphasis the things they had said already any
time that twelvemonth? Assuredly, among these flushed and dull-eyed men
there were some whom--thanks to their native human-kindness--even riot
could never drive into brutality; men who, when their cheeks were
fresh, had felt the keen point of sorrow or remorse, had been pierced
by the reeds they leaned on, or had lightly put their limbs in fetters
from which no struggle could loose them; and under these sad
circumstances, common to us all, their thoughts could find no
resting-place outside the ever-trodden round of their own petty history.

That, at least, was the condition of Godfrey Cass in this
six-and-twentieth year of his life.  A movement of compunction, helped
by those small indefinable influences which every personal relation
exerts on a pliant nature, had urged him into a secret marriage, which
was a blight on his life.  It was an ugly story of low passion,
delusion, and waking from delusion, which needs not to be dragged from
the privacy of Godfrey's bitter memory.  He had long known that the
delusion was partly due to a trap laid for him by Dunstan, who saw in
his brother's degrading marriage the means of gratifying at once his
jealous hate and his cupidity.  And if Godfrey could have felt himself
simply a victim, the iron bit that destiny had put into his mouth would
have chafed him less intolerably.  If the curses he muttered half aloud
when he was alone had had no other object than Dunstan's diabolical
cunning, he might have shrunk less from the consequences of avowal.
But he had something else to curse--his own vicious folly, which now
seemed as mad and unaccountable to him as almost all our follies and
vices do when their promptings have long passed away.  For four years
he had thought of Nancy Lammeter, and wooed her with tacit patient
worship, as the woman who made him think of the future with joy: she
would be his wife, and would make home lovely to him, as his father's
home had never been; and it would be easy, when she was always near, to
shake off those foolish habits that were no pleasures, but only a
feverish way of annulling vacancy.  Godfrey's was an essentially
domestic nature, bred up in a home where the hearth had no smiles, and
where the daily habits were not chastised by the presence of household
order.  His easy disposition made him fall in unresistingly with the
family courses, but the need of some tender permanent affection, the
longing for some influence that would make the good he preferred easy
to pursue, caused the neatness, purity, and liberal orderliness of the
Lammeter household, sunned by the smile of Nancy, to seem like those
fresh bright hours of the morning when temptations go to sleep and
leave the ear open to the voice of the good angel, inviting to
industry, sobriety, and peace.  And yet the hope of this paradise had
not been enough to save him from a course which shut him out of it for
ever.  Instead of keeping fast hold of the strong silken rope by which
Nancy would have drawn him safe to the green banks where it was easy to
step firmly, he had let himself be dragged back into mud and slime, in
which it was useless to struggle.  He had made ties for himself which
robbed him of all wholesome motive, and were a constant exasperation.

Still, there was one position worse than the present: it was the
position he would be in when the ugly secret was disclosed; and the
desire that continually triumphed over every other was that of warding
off the evil day, when he would have to bear the consequences of his
father's violent resentment for the wound inflicted on his family
pride--would have, perhaps, to turn his back on that hereditary ease
and dignity which, after all, was a sort of reason for living, and
would carry with him the certainty that he was banished for ever from
the sight and esteem of Nancy Lammeter.  The longer the interval, the
more chance there was of deliverance from some, at least, of the
hateful consequences to which he had sold himself; the more
opportunities remained for him to snatch the strange gratification of
seeing Nancy, and gathering some faint indications of her lingering
regard.  Towards this gratification he was impelled, fitfully, every
now and then, after having passed weeks in which he had avoided her as
the far-off bright-winged prize that only made him spring forward and
find his chain all the more galling.  One of those fits of yearning was
on him now, and it would have been strong enough to have persuaded him
to trust Wildfire to Dunstan rather than disappoint the yearning, even
if he had not had another reason for his disinclination towards the
morrow's hunt.  That other reason was the fact that the morning's meet
was near Batherley, the market-town where the unhappy woman lived,
whose image became more odious to him every day; and to his thought the
whole vicinage was haunted by her.  The yoke a man creates for himself
by wrong-doing will breed hate in the kindliest nature; and the
good-humoured, affectionate-hearted Godfrey Cass was fast becoming a
bitter man, visited by cruel wishes, that seemed to enter, and depart,
and enter again, like demons who had found in him a ready-garnished
home.

What was he to do this evening to pass the time?  He might as well go
to the Rainbow, and hear the talk about the cock-fighting: everybody
was there, and what else was there to be done?  Though, for his own
part, he did not care a button for cock-fighting. Snuff, the brown
spaniel, who had placed herself in front of him, and had been watching
him for some time, now jumped up in impatience for the expected caress.
But Godfrey thrust her away without looking at her, and left the room,
followed humbly by the unresenting Snuff--perhaps because she saw no
other career open to her.



CHAPTER IV

Dunstan Cass, setting off in the raw morning, at the judiciously quiet
pace of a man who is obliged to ride to cover on his hunter, had to
take his way along the lane which, at its farther extremity, passed by
the piece of unenclosed ground called the Stone-pit, where stood the
cottage, once a stone-cutter's shed, now for fifteen years inhabited by
Silas Marner.  The spot looked very dreary at this season, with the
moist trodden clay about it, and the red, muddy water high up in the
deserted quarry.  That was Dunstan's first thought as he approached it;
the second was, that the old fool of a weaver, whose loom he heard
rattling already, had a great deal of money hidden somewhere.  How was
it that he, Dunstan Cass, who had often heard talk of Marner's
miserliness, had never thought of suggesting to Godfrey that he should
frighten or persuade the old fellow into lending the money on the
excellent security of the young Squire's prospects?  The resource
occurred to him now as so easy and agreeable, especially as Marner's
hoard was likely to be large enough to leave Godfrey a handsome surplus
beyond his immediate needs, and enable him to accommodate his faithful
brother, that he had almost turned the horse's head towards home again.
Godfrey would be ready enough to accept the suggestion: he would snatch
eagerly at a plan that might save him from parting with Wildfire. But
when Dunstan's meditation reached this point, the inclination to go on
grew strong and prevailed.  He didn't want to give Godfrey that
pleasure: he preferred that Master Godfrey should be vexed. Moreover,
Dunstan enjoyed the self-important consciousness of having a horse to
sell, and the opportunity of driving a bargain, swaggering, and
possibly taking somebody in.  He might have all the satisfaction
attendant on selling his brother's horse, and not the less have the
further satisfaction of setting Godfrey to borrow Marner's money.  So
he rode on to cover.

Bryce and Keating were there, as Dunstan was quite sure they would
be--he was such a lucky fellow.

"Heyday!"  said Bryce, who had long had his eye on Wildfire, "you're on
your brother's horse to-day: how's that?"

"Oh, I've swopped with him," said Dunstan, whose delight in lying,
grandly independent of utility, was not to be diminished by the
likelihood that his hearer would not believe him--"Wildfire's mine now."

"What!  has he swopped with you for that big-boned hack of yours?" said
Bryce, quite aware that he should get another lie in answer.

"Oh, there was a little account between us," said Dunsey, carelessly,
"and Wildfire made it even.  I accommodated him by taking the horse,
though it was against my will, for I'd got an itch for a mare o'
Jortin's--as rare a bit o' blood as ever you threw your leg across.
But I shall keep Wildfire, now I've got him, though I'd a bid of a
hundred and fifty for him the other day, from a man over at
Flitton--he's buying for Lord Cromleck--a fellow with a cast in his
eye, and a green waistcoat.  But I mean to stick to Wildfire: I shan't
get a better at a fence in a hurry.  The mare's got more blood, but
she's a bit too weak in the hind-quarters."

Bryce of course divined that Dunstan wanted to sell the horse, and
Dunstan knew that he divined it (horse-dealing is only one of many
human transactions carried on in this ingenious manner); and they both
considered that the bargain was in its first stage, when Bryce replied
ironically--

"I wonder at that now; I wonder you mean to keep him; for I never heard
of a man who didn't want to sell his horse getting a bid of half as
much again as the horse was worth.  You'll be lucky if you get a
hundred."

Keating rode up now, and the transaction became more complicated. It
ended in the purchase of the horse by Bryce for a hundred and twenty,
to be paid on the delivery of Wildfire, safe and sound, at the
Batherley stables.  It did occur to Dunsey that it might be wise for
him to give up the day's hunting, proceed at once to Batherley, and,
having waited for Bryce's return, hire a horse to carry him home with
the money in his pocket.  But the inclination for a run, encouraged by
confidence in his luck, and by a draught of brandy from his
pocket-pistol at the conclusion of the bargain, was not easy to
overcome, especially with a horse under him that would take the fences
to the admiration of the field.  Dunstan, however, took one fence too
many, and got his horse pierced with a hedge-stake. His own
ill-favoured person, which was quite unmarketable, escaped without
injury; but poor Wildfire, unconscious of his price, turned on his
flank and painfully panted his last.  It happened that Dunstan, a short
time before, having had to get down to arrange his stirrup, had
muttered a good many curses at this interruption, which had thrown him
in the rear of the hunt near the moment of glory, and under this
exasperation had taken the fences more blindly.  He would soon have
been up with the hounds again, when the fatal accident happened; and
hence he was between eager riders in advance, not troubling themselves
about what happened behind them, and far-off stragglers, who were as
likely as not to pass quite aloof from the line of road in which
Wildfire had fallen.  Dunstan, whose nature it was to care more for
immediate annoyances than for remote consequences, no sooner recovered
his legs, and saw that it was all over with Wildfire, than he felt a
satisfaction at the absence of witnesses to a position which no
swaggering could make enviable. Reinforcing himself, after his shake,
with a little brandy and much swearing, he walked as fast as he could
to a coppice on his right hand, through which it occurred to him that
he could make his way to Batherley without danger of encountering any
member of the hunt. His first intention was to hire a horse there and
ride home forthwith, for to walk many miles without a gun in his hand,
and along an ordinary road, was as much out of the question to him as
to other spirited young men of his kind.  He did not much mind about
taking the bad news to Godfrey, for he had to offer him at the same
time the resource of Marner's money; and if Godfrey kicked, as he
always did, at the notion of making a fresh debt from which he himself
got the smallest share of advantage, why, he wouldn't kick long:
Dunstan felt sure he could worry Godfrey into anything.  The idea of
Marner's money kept growing in vividness, now the want of it had become
immediate; the prospect of having to make his appearance with the muddy
boots of a pedestrian at Batherley, and to encounter the grinning
queries of stablemen, stood unpleasantly in the way of his impatience
to be back at Raveloe and carry out his felicitous plan; and a casual
visitation of his waistcoat-pocket, as he was ruminating, awakened his
memory to the fact that the two or three small coins his forefinger
encountered there were of too pale a colour to cover that small debt,
without payment of which the stable-keeper had declared he would never
do any more business with Dunsey Cass.  After all, according to the
direction in which the run had brought him, he was not so very much
farther from home than he was from Batherley; but Dunsey, not being
remarkable for clearness of head, was only led to this conclusion by
the gradual perception that there were other reasons for choosing the
unprecedented course of walking home.  It was now nearly four o'clock,
and a mist was gathering: the sooner he got into the road the better.
He remembered having crossed the road and seen the finger-post only a
little while before Wildfire broke down; so, buttoning his coat,
twisting the lash of his hunting-whip compactly round the handle, and
rapping the tops of his boots with a self-possessed air, as if to
assure himself that he was not at all taken by surprise, he set off
with the sense that he was undertaking a remarkable feat of bodily
exertion, which somehow and at some time he should be able to dress up
and magnify to the admiration of a select circle at the Rainbow.  When
a young gentleman like Dunsey is reduced to so exceptional a mode of
locomotion as walking, a whip in his hand is a desirable corrective to
a too bewildering dreamy sense of unwontedness in his position; and
Dunstan, as he went along through the gathering mist, was always
rapping his whip somewhere.  It was Godfrey's whip, which he had chosen
to take without leave because it had a gold handle; of course no one
could see, when Dunstan held it, that the name _Godfrey Cass_ was cut
in deep letters on that gold handle--they could only see that it was a
very handsome whip. Dunsey was not without fear that he might meet some
acquaintance in whose eyes he would cut a pitiable figure, for mist is
no screen when people get close to each other; but when he at last
found himself in the well-known Raveloe lanes without having met a
soul, he silently remarked that that was part of his usual good luck.
But now the mist, helped by the evening darkness, was more of a screen
than he desired, for it hid the ruts into which his feet were liable to
slip--hid everything, so that he had to guide his steps by dragging his
whip along the low bushes in advance of the hedgerow. He must soon, he
thought, be getting near the opening at the Stone-pits: he should find
it out by the break in the hedgerow.  He found it out, however, by
another circumstance which he had not expected--namely, by certain
gleams of light, which he presently guessed to proceed from Silas
Marner's cottage.  That cottage and the money hidden within it had been
in his mind continually during his walk, and he had been imagining ways
of cajoling and tempting the weaver to part with the immediate
possession of his money for the sake of receiving interest.  Dunstan
felt as if there must be a little frightening added to the cajolery,
for his own arithmetical convictions were not clear enough to afford
him any forcible demonstration as to the advantages of interest; and as
for security, he regarded it vaguely as a means of cheating a man by
making him believe that he would be paid.  Altogether, the operation on
the miser's mind was a task that Godfrey would be sure to hand over to
his more daring and cunning brother: Dunstan had made up his mind to
that; and by the time he saw the light gleaming through the chinks of
Marner's shutters, the idea of a dialogue with the weaver had become so
familiar to him, that it occurred to him as quite a natural thing to
make the acquaintance forthwith.  There might be several conveniences
attending this course: the weaver had possibly got a lantern, and
Dunstan was tired of feeling his way.  He was still nearly
three-quarters of a mile from home, and the lane was becoming
unpleasantly slippery, for the mist was passing into rain. He turned up
the bank, not without some fear lest he might miss the right way, since
he was not certain whether the light were in front or on the side of
the cottage.  But he felt the ground before him cautiously with his
whip-handle, and at last arrived safely at the door.  He knocked
loudly, rather enjoying the idea that the old fellow would be
frightened at the sudden noise.  He heard no movement in reply: all was
silence in the cottage.  Was the weaver gone to bed, then?  If so, why
had he left a light?  That was a strange forgetfulness in a miser.
Dunstan knocked still more loudly, and, without pausing for a reply,
pushed his fingers through the latch-hole, intending to shake the door
and pull the latch-string up and down, not doubting that the door was
fastened. But, to his surprise, at this double motion the door opened,
and he found himself in front of a bright fire which lit up every
corner of the cottage--the bed, the loom, the three chairs, and the
table--and showed him that Marner was not there.

Nothing at that moment could be much more inviting to Dunsey than the
bright fire on the brick hearth: he walked in and seated himself by it
at once.  There was something in front of the fire, too, that would
have been inviting to a hungry man, if it had been in a different stage
of cooking.  It was a small bit of pork suspended from the
kettle-hanger by a string passed through a large door-key, in a way
known to primitive housekeepers unpossessed of jacks.  But the pork had
been hung at the farthest extremity of the hanger, apparently to
prevent the roasting from proceeding too rapidly during the owner's
absence.  The old staring simpleton had hot meat for his supper, then?
thought Dunstan.  People had always said he lived on mouldy bread, on
purpose to check his appetite.  But where could he be at this time, and
on such an evening, leaving his supper in this stage of preparation,
and his door unfastened?  Dunstan's own recent difficulty in making his
way suggested to him that the weaver had perhaps gone outside his
cottage to fetch in fuel, or for some such brief purpose, and had
slipped into the Stone-pit.  That was an interesting idea to Dunstan,
carrying consequences of entire novelty.  If the weaver was dead, who
had a right to his money?  Who would know where his money was hidden?
_Who would know that anybody had come to take it away?_  He went no
farther into the subtleties of evidence: the pressing question, "Where
_is_ the money?"  now took such entire possession of him as to make him
quite forget that the weaver's death was not a certainty.  A dull mind,
once arriving at an inference that flatters a desire, is rarely able to
retain the impression that the notion from which the inference started
was purely problematic.  And Dunstan's mind was as dull as the mind of
a possible felon usually is.  There were only three hiding-places where
he had ever heard of cottagers' hoards being found: the thatch, the
bed, and a hole in the floor.  Marner's cottage had no thatch; and
Dunstan's first act, after a train of thought made rapid by the
stimulus of cupidity, was to go up to the bed; but while he did so, his
eyes travelled eagerly over the floor, where the bricks, distinct in
the fire-light, were discernible under the sprinkling of sand.  But not
everywhere; for there was one spot, and one only, which was quite
covered with sand, and sand showing the marks of fingers, which had
apparently been careful to spread it over a given space.  It was near
the treddles of the loom.  In an instant Dunstan darted to that spot,
swept away the sand with his whip, and, inserting the thin end of the
hook between the bricks, found that they were loose.  In haste he
lifted up two bricks, and saw what he had no doubt was the object of
his search; for what could there be but money in those two leathern
bags?  And, from their weight, they must be filled with guineas.
Dunstan felt round the hole, to be certain that it held no more; then
hastily replaced the bricks, and spread the sand over them.  Hardly
more than five minutes had passed since he entered the cottage, but it
seemed to Dunstan like a long while; and though he was without any
distinct recognition of the possibility that Marner might be alive, and
might re-enter the cottage at any moment, he felt an undefinable dread
laying hold on him, as he rose to his feet with the bags in his hand.
He would hasten out into the darkness, and then consider what he should
do with the bags.  He closed the door behind him immediately, that he
might shut in the stream of light: a few steps would be enough to carry
him beyond betrayal by the gleams from the shutter-chinks and the
latch-hole.  The rain and darkness had got thicker, and he was glad of
it; though it was awkward walking with both hands filled, so that it
was as much as he could do to grasp his whip along with one of the
bags.  But when he had gone a yard or two, he might take his time.  So
he stepped forward into the darkness.



CHAPTER V

When Dunstan Cass turned his back on the cottage, Silas Marner was not
more than a hundred yards away from it, plodding along from the village
with a sack thrown round his shoulders as an overcoat, and with a horn
lantern in his hand.  His legs were weary, but his mind was at ease,
free from the presentiment of change.  The sense of security more
frequently springs from habit than from conviction, and for this reason
it often subsists after such a change in the conditions as might have
been expected to suggest alarm.  The lapse of time during which a given
event has not happened, is, in this logic of habit, constantly alleged
as a reason why the event should never happen, even when the lapse of
time is precisely the added condition which makes the event imminent.
A man will tell you that he has worked in a mine for forty years unhurt
by an accident as a reason why he should apprehend no danger, though
the roof is beginning to sink; and it is often observable, that the
older a man gets, the more difficult it is to him to retain a believing
conception of his own death.  This influence of habit was necessarily
strong in a man whose life was so monotonous as Marner's--who saw no
new people and heard of no new events to keep alive in him the idea of
the unexpected and the changeful; and it explains simply enough, why
his mind could be at ease, though he had left his house and his
treasure more defenceless than usual.  Silas was thinking with double
complacency of his supper: first, because it would be hot and savoury;
and secondly, because it would cost him nothing.  For the little bit of
pork was a present from that excellent housewife, Miss Priscilla
Lammeter, to whom he had this day carried home a handsome piece of
linen; and it was only on occasion of a present like this, that Silas
indulged himself with roast-meat.  Supper was his favourite meal,
because it came at his time of revelry, when his heart warmed over his
gold; whenever he had roast-meat, he always chose to have it for
supper.  But this evening, he had no sooner ingeniously knotted his
string fast round his bit of pork, twisted the string according to rule
over his door-key, passed it through the handle, and made it fast on
the hanger, than he remembered that a piece of very fine twine was
indispensable to his "setting up" a new piece of work in his loom early
in the morning.  It had slipped his memory, because, in coming from Mr.
Lammeter's, he had not had to pass through the village; but to lose
time by going on errands in the morning was out of the question.  It
was a nasty fog to turn out into, but there were things Silas loved
better than his own comfort; so, drawing his pork to the extremity of
the hanger, and arming himself with his lantern and his old sack, he
set out on what, in ordinary weather, would have been a twenty minutes'
errand.  He could not have locked his door without undoing his
well-knotted string and retarding his supper; it was not worth his
while to make that sacrifice.  What thief would find his way to the
Stone-pits on such a night as this? and why should he come on this
particular night, when he had never come through all the fifteen years
before?  These questions were not distinctly present in Silas's mind;
they merely serve to represent the vaguely-felt foundation of his
freedom from anxiety.

He reached his door in much satisfaction that his errand was done: he
opened it, and to his short-sighted eyes everything remained as he had
left it, except that the fire sent out a welcome increase of heat.  He
trod about the floor while putting by his lantern and throwing aside
his hat and sack, so as to merge the marks of Dunstan's feet on the
sand in the marks of his own nailed boots. Then he moved his pork
nearer to the fire, and sat down to the agreeable business of tending
the meat and warming himself at the same time.

Any one who had looked at him as the red light shone upon his pale
face, strange straining eyes, and meagre form, would perhaps have
understood the mixture of contemptuous pity, dread, and suspicion with
which he was regarded by his neighbours in Raveloe.  Yet few men could
be more harmless than poor Marner.  In his truthful simple soul, not
even the growing greed and worship of gold could beget any vice
directly injurious to others.  The light of his faith quite put out,
and his affections made desolate, he had clung with all the force of
his nature to his work and his money; and like all objects to which a
man devotes himself, they had fashioned him into correspondence with
themselves.  His loom, as he wrought in it without ceasing, had in its
turn wrought on him, and confirmed more and more the monotonous craving
for its monotonous response.  His gold, as he hung over it and saw it
grow, gathered his power of loving together into a hard isolation like
its own.

As soon as he was warm he began to think it would be a long while to
wait till after supper before he drew out his guineas, and it would be
pleasant to see them on the table before him as he ate his unwonted
feast.  For joy is the best of wine, and Silas's guineas were a golden
wine of that sort.

He rose and placed his candle unsuspectingly on the floor near his
loom, swept away the sand without noticing any change, and removed the
bricks.  The sight of the empty hole made his heart leap violently, but
the belief that his gold was gone could not come at once--only terror,
and the eager effort to put an end to the terror.  He passed his
trembling hand all about the hole, trying to think it possible that his
eyes had deceived him; then he held the candle in the hole and examined
it curiously, trembling more and more.  At last he shook so violently
that he let fall the candle, and lifted his hands to his head, trying
to steady himself, that he might think.  Had he put his gold somewhere
else, by a sudden resolution last night, and then forgotten it?  A man
falling into dark waters seeks a momentary footing even on sliding
stones; and Silas, by acting as if he believed in false hopes, warded
off the moment of despair.  He searched in every corner, he turned his
bed over, and shook it, and kneaded it; he looked in his brick oven
where he laid his sticks.  When there was no other place to be
searched, he kneeled down again and felt once more all round the hole.
There was no untried refuge left for a moment's shelter from the
terrible truth.

Yes, there was a sort of refuge which always comes with the prostration
of thought under an overpowering passion: it was that expectation of
impossibilities, that belief in contradictory images, which is still
distinct from madness, because it is capable of being dissipated by the
external fact.  Silas got up from his knees trembling, and looked round
at the table: didn't the gold lie there after all?  The table was bare.
Then he turned and looked behind him--looked all round his dwelling,
seeming to strain his brown eyes after some possible appearance of the
bags where he had already sought them in vain.  He could see every
object in his cottage--and his gold was not there.

Again he put his trembling hands to his head, and gave a wild ringing
scream, the cry of desolation.  For a few moments after, he stood
motionless; but the cry had relieved him from the first maddening
pressure of the truth.  He turned, and tottered towards his loom, and
got into the seat where he worked, instinctively seeking this as the
strongest assurance of reality.

And now that all the false hopes had vanished, and the first shock of
certainty was past, the idea of a thief began to present itself, and he
entertained it eagerly, because a thief might be caught and made to
restore the gold.  The thought brought some new strength with it, and
he started from his loom to the door.  As he opened it the rain beat in
upon him, for it was falling more and more heavily. There were no
footsteps to be tracked on such a night--footsteps? When had the thief
come?  During Silas's absence in the daytime the door had been locked,
and there had been no marks of any inroad on his return by daylight.
And in the evening, too, he said to himself, everything was the same as
when he had left it.  The sand and bricks looked as if they had not
been moved.  _Was_ it a thief who had taken the bags?  or was it a
cruel power that no hands could reach, which had delighted in making
him a second time desolate?  He shrank from this vaguer dread, and
fixed his mind with struggling effort on the robber with hands, who
could be reached by hands.  His thoughts glanced at all the neighbours
who had made any remarks, or asked any questions which he might now
regard as a ground of suspicion.  There was Jem Rodney, a known
poacher, and otherwise disreputable: he had often met Marner in his
journeys across the fields, and had said something jestingly about the
weaver's money; nay, he had once irritated Marner, by lingering at the
fire when he called to light his pipe, instead of going about his
business.  Jem Rodney was the man--there was ease in the thought.  Jem
could be found and made to restore the money: Marner did not want to
punish him, but only to get back his gold which had gone from him, and
left his soul like a forlorn traveller on an unknown desert.  The
robber must be laid hold of.  Marner's ideas of legal authority were
confused, but he felt that he must go and proclaim his loss; and the
great people in the village--the clergyman, the constable, and Squire
Cass--would make Jem Rodney, or somebody else, deliver up the stolen
money.  He rushed out in the rain, under the stimulus of this hope,
forgetting to cover his head, not caring to fasten his door; for he
felt as if he had nothing left to lose.  He ran swiftly, till want of
breath compelled him to slacken his pace as he was entering the village
at the turning close to the Rainbow.

The Rainbow, in Marner's view, was a place of luxurious resort for rich
and stout husbands, whose wives had superfluous stores of linen; it was
the place where he was likely to find the powers and dignities of
Raveloe, and where he could most speedily make his loss public.  He
lifted the latch, and turned into the bright bar or kitchen on the
right hand, where the less lofty customers of the house were in the
habit of assembling, the parlour on the left being reserved for the
more select society in which Squire Cass frequently enjoyed the double
pleasure of conviviality and condescension.  But the parlour was dark
to-night, the chief personages who ornamented its circle being all at
Mrs. Osgood's birthday dance, as Godfrey Cass was.  And in consequence
of this, the party on the high-screened seats in the kitchen was more
numerous than usual; several personages, who would otherwise have been
admitted into the parlour and enlarged the opportunity of hectoring and
condescension for their betters, being content this evening to vary
their enjoyment by taking their spirits-and-water where they could
themselves hector and condescend in company that called for beer.



CHAPTER VI

The conversation, which was at a high pitch of animation when Silas
approached the door of the Rainbow, had, as usual, been slow and
intermittent when the company first assembled.  The pipes began to be
puffed in a silence which had an air of severity; the more important
customers, who drank spirits and sat nearest the fire, staring at each
other as if a bet were depending on the first man who winked; while the
beer-drinkers, chiefly men in fustian jackets and smock-frocks, kept
their eyelids down and rubbed their hands across their mouths, as if
their draughts of beer were a funereal duty attended with embarrassing
sadness.  At last Mr. Snell, the landlord, a man of a neutral
disposition, accustomed to stand aloof from human differences as those
of beings who were all alike in need of liquor, broke silence, by
saying in a doubtful tone to his cousin the butcher--

"Some folks 'ud say that was a fine beast you druv in yesterday, Bob?"

The butcher, a jolly, smiling, red-haired man, was not disposed to
answer rashly.  He gave a few puffs before he spat and replied, "And
they wouldn't be fur wrong, John."

After this feeble delusive thaw, the silence set in as severely as
before.

"Was it a red Durham?"  said the farrier, taking up the thread of
discourse after the lapse of a few minutes.

The farrier looked at the landlord, and the landlord looked at the
butcher, as the person who must take the responsibility of answering.

"Red it was," said the butcher, in his good-humoured husky treble--"and
a Durham it was."

"Then you needn't tell _me_ who you bought it of," said the farrier,
looking round with some triumph; "I know who it is has got the red
Durhams o' this country-side.  And she'd a white star on her brow, I'll
bet a penny?"  The farrier leaned forward with his hands on his knees
as he put this question, and his eyes twinkled knowingly.

"Well; yes--she might," said the butcher, slowly, considering that he
was giving a decided affirmative.  "I don't say contrairy."

"I knew that very well," said the farrier, throwing himself backward
again, and speaking defiantly; "if _I_ don't know Mr. Lammeter's cows,
I should like to know who does--that's all. And as for the cow you've
bought, bargain or no bargain, I've been at the drenching of
her--contradick me who will."

The farrier looked fierce, and the mild butcher's conversational spirit
was roused a little.

"I'm not for contradicking no man," he said; "I'm for peace and
quietness.  Some are for cutting long ribs--I'm for cutting 'em short
myself; but _I_ don't quarrel with 'em.  All I say is, it's a lovely
carkiss--and anybody as was reasonable, it 'ud bring tears into their
eyes to look at it."

"Well, it's the cow as I drenched, whatever it is," pursued the
farrier, angrily; "and it was Mr. Lammeter's cow, else you told a lie
when you said it was a red Durham."

"I tell no lies," said the butcher, with the same mild huskiness as
before, "and I contradick none--not if a man was to swear himself
black: he's no meat o' mine, nor none o' my bargains.  All I say is,
it's a lovely carkiss.  And what I say, I'll stick to; but I'll quarrel
wi' no man."

"No," said the farrier, with bitter sarcasm, looking at the company
generally; "and p'rhaps you aren't pig-headed; and p'rhaps you didn't
say the cow was a red Durham; and p'rhaps you didn't say she'd got a
star on her brow--stick to that, now you're at it."

"Come, come," said the landlord; "let the cow alone.  The truth lies
atween you: you're both right and both wrong, as I allays say. And as
for the cow's being Mr. Lammeter's, I say nothing to that; but this I
say, as the Rainbow's the Rainbow.  And for the matter o' that, if the
talk is to be o' the Lammeters, _you_ know the most upo' that head, eh,
Mr. Macey?  You remember when first Mr. Lammeter's father come into
these parts, and took the Warrens?"

Mr. Macey, tailor and parish-clerk, the latter of which functions
rheumatism had of late obliged him to share with a small-featured young
man who sat opposite him, held his white head on one side, and twirled
his thumbs with an air of complacency, slightly seasoned with
criticism.  He smiled pityingly, in answer to the landlord's appeal,
and said--

"Aye, aye; I know, I know; but I let other folks talk.  I've laid by
now, and gev up to the young uns.  Ask them as have been to school at
Tarley: they've learnt pernouncing; that's come up since my day."

"If you're pointing at me, Mr. Macey," said the deputy clerk, with an
air of anxious propriety, "I'm nowise a man to speak out of my place.
As the psalm says--

  "I know what's right, nor only so,
  But also practise what I know."


"Well, then, I wish you'd keep hold o' the tune, when it's set for you;
if you're for prac_tis_ing, I wish you'd prac_tise_ that," said a large
jocose-looking man, an excellent wheelwright in his week-day capacity,
but on Sundays leader of the choir.  He winked, as he spoke, at two of
the company, who were known officially as the "bassoon" and the
"key-bugle", in the confidence that he was expressing the sense of the
musical profession in Raveloe.

Mr. Tookey, the deputy-clerk, who shared the unpopularity common to
deputies, turned very red, but replied, with careful moderation--"Mr.
Winthrop, if you'll bring me any proof as I'm in the wrong, I'm not the
man to say I won't alter.  But there's people set up their own ears for
a standard, and expect the whole choir to follow 'em.  There may be two
opinions, I hope."

"Aye, aye," said Mr. Macey, who felt very well satisfied with this
attack on youthful presumption; "you're right there, Tookey: there's
allays two 'pinions; there's the 'pinion a man has of himsen, and
there's the 'pinion other folks have on him.  There'd be two 'pinions
about a cracked bell, if the bell could hear itself."

"Well, Mr. Macey," said poor Tookey, serious amidst the general
laughter, "I undertook to partially fill up the office of parish-clerk
by Mr. Crackenthorp's desire, whenever your infirmities should make you
unfitting; and it's one of the rights thereof to sing in the
choir--else why have you done the same yourself?"

"Ah! but the old gentleman and you are two folks," said Ben Winthrop.
"The old gentleman's got a gift.  Why, the Squire used to invite him to
take a glass, only to hear him sing the "Red Rovier"; didn't he, Mr.
Macey?  It's a nat'ral gift.  There's my little lad Aaron, he's got a
gift--he can sing a tune off straight, like a throstle.  But as for
you, Master Tookey, you'd better stick to your "Amens": your voice is
well enough when you keep it up in your nose.  It's your inside as
isn't right made for music: it's no better nor a hollow stalk."

This kind of unflinching frankness was the most piquant form of joke to
the company at the Rainbow, and Ben Winthrop's insult was felt by
everybody to have capped Mr. Macey's epigram.

"I see what it is plain enough," said Mr. Tookey, unable to keep cool
any longer.  "There's a consperacy to turn me out o' the choir, as I
shouldn't share the Christmas money--that's where it is.  But I shall
speak to Mr. Crackenthorp; I'll not be put upon by no man."

"Nay, nay, Tookey," said Ben Winthrop.  "We'll pay you your share to
keep out of it--that's what we'll do.  There's things folks 'ud pay to
be rid on, besides varmin."

"Come, come," said the landlord, who felt that paying people for their
absence was a principle dangerous to society; "a joke's a joke.  We're
all good friends here, I hope.  We must give and take. You're both
right and you're both wrong, as I say.  I agree wi' Mr. Macey here, as
there's two opinions; and if mine was asked, I should say they're both
right.  Tookey's right and Winthrop's right, and they've only got to
split the difference and make themselves even."

The farrier was puffing his pipe rather fiercely, in some contempt at
this trivial discussion.  He had no ear for music himself, and never
went to church, as being of the medical profession, and likely to be in
requisition for delicate cows.  But the butcher, having music in his
soul, had listened with a divided desire for Tookey's defeat and for
the preservation of the peace.

"To be sure," he said, following up the landlord's conciliatory view,
"we're fond of our old clerk; it's nat'ral, and him used to be such a
singer, and got a brother as is known for the first fiddler in this
country-side.  Eh, it's a pity but what Solomon lived in our village,
and could give us a tune when we liked; eh, Mr. Macey?  I'd keep him in
liver and lights for nothing--that I would."

"Aye, aye," said Mr. Macey, in the height of complacency; "our family's
been known for musicianers as far back as anybody can tell. But them
things are dying out, as I tell Solomon every time he comes round;
there's no voices like what there used to be, and there's nobody
remembers what we remember, if it isn't the old crows."

"Aye, you remember when first Mr. Lammeter's father come into these
parts, don't you, Mr. Macey?"  said the landlord.

"I should think I did," said the old man, who had now gone through that
complimentary process necessary to bring him up to the point of
narration; "and a fine old gentleman he was--as fine, and finer nor the
Mr. Lammeter as now is.  He came from a bit north'ard, so far as I
could ever make out.  But there's nobody rightly knows about those
parts: only it couldn't be far north'ard, nor much different from this
country, for he brought a fine breed o' sheep with him, so there must
be pastures there, and everything reasonable.  We heared tell as he'd
sold his own land to come and take the Warrens, and that seemed odd for
a man as had land of his own, to come and rent a farm in a strange
place.  But they said it was along of his wife's dying; though there's
reasons in things as nobody knows on--that's pretty much what I've made
out; yet some folks are so wise, they'll find you fifty reasons
straight off, and all the while the real reason's winking at 'em in the
corner, and they niver see't.  Howsomever, it was soon seen as we'd got
a new parish'ner as know'd the rights and customs o' things, and kep a
good house, and was well looked on by everybody.  And the young
man--that's the Mr. Lammeter as now is, for he'd niver a sister--soon
begun to court Miss Osgood, that's the sister o' the Mr. Osgood as now
is, and a fine handsome lass she was--eh, you can't think--they pretend
this young lass is like her, but that's the way wi' people as don't
know what come before 'em.  _I_ should know, for I helped the old
rector, Mr. Drumlow as was, I helped him marry 'em."

Here Mr. Macey paused; he always gave his narrative in instalments,
expecting to be questioned according to precedent.

"Aye, and a partic'lar thing happened, didn't it, Mr. Macey, so as you
were likely to remember that marriage?"  said the landlord, in a
congratulatory tone.

"I should think there did--a _very_ partic'lar thing," said Mr. Macey,
nodding sideways.  "For Mr. Drumlow--poor old gentleman, I was fond on
him, though he'd got a bit confused in his head, what wi' age and wi'
taking a drop o' summat warm when the service come of a cold morning.
And young Mr. Lammeter, he'd have no way but he must be married in
Janiwary, which, to be sure, 's a unreasonable time to be married in,
for it isn't like a christening or a burying, as you can't help; and so
Mr. Drumlow--poor old gentleman, I was fond on him--but when he come to
put the questions, he put 'em by the rule o' contrairy, like, and he
says, "Wilt thou have this man to thy wedded wife?"  says he, and then
he says, "Wilt thou have this woman to thy wedded husband?" says he.
But the partic'larest thing of all is, as nobody took any notice on it
but me, and they answered straight off "yes", like as if it had been me
saying "Amen" i' the right place, without listening to what went
before."

"But _you_ knew what was going on well enough, didn't you, Mr. Macey?
You were live enough, eh?"  said the butcher.

"Lor bless you!"  said Mr. Macey, pausing, and smiling in pity at the
impotence of his hearer's imagination--"why, I was all of a tremble: it
was as if I'd been a coat pulled by the two tails, like; for I couldn't
stop the parson, I couldn't take upon me to do that; and yet I said to
myself, I says, "Suppose they shouldn't be fast married, 'cause the
words are contrairy?"  and my head went working like a mill, for I was
allays uncommon for turning things over and seeing all round 'em; and I
says to myself, "Is't the meanin' or the words as makes folks fast i'
wedlock?"  For the parson meant right, and the bride and bridegroom
meant right.  But then, when I come to think on it, meanin' goes but a
little way i' most things, for you may mean to stick things together
and your glue may be bad, and then where are you?  And so I says to
mysen, "It isn't the meanin', it's the glue."  And I was worreted as if
I'd got three bells to pull at once, when we went into the vestry, and
they begun to sign their names.  But where's the use o' talking?--you
can't think what goes on in a 'cute man's inside."

"But you held in for all that, didn't you, Mr. Macey?"  said the
landlord.

"Aye, I held in tight till I was by mysen wi' Mr. Drumlow, and then I
out wi' everything, but respectful, as I allays did.  And he made light
on it, and he says, "Pooh, pooh, Macey, make yourself easy," he says;
"it's neither the meaning nor the words--it's the re_ges_ter does
it--that's the glue."  So you see he settled it easy; for parsons and
doctors know everything by heart, like, so as they aren't worreted wi'
thinking what's the rights and wrongs o' things, as I'n been many and
many's the time.  And sure enough the wedding turned out all right,
on'y poor Mrs. Lammeter--that's Miss Osgood as was--died afore the
lasses was growed up; but for prosperity and everything respectable,
there's no family more looked on."

Every one of Mr. Macey's audience had heard this story many times, but
it was listened to as if it had been a favourite tune, and at certain
points the puffing of the pipes was momentarily suspended, that the
listeners might give their whole minds to the expected words.  But
there was more to come; and Mr. Snell, the landlord, duly put the
leading question.

"Why, old Mr. Lammeter had a pretty fortin, didn't they say, when he
come into these parts?"

"Well, yes," said Mr. Macey; "but I daresay it's as much as this Mr.
Lammeter's done to keep it whole.  For there was allays a talk as
nobody could get rich on the Warrens: though he holds it cheap, for
it's what they call Charity Land."

"Aye, and there's few folks know so well as you how it come to be
Charity Land, eh, Mr. Macey?"  said the butcher.

"How should they?"  said the old clerk, with some contempt. "Why, my
grandfather made the grooms' livery for that Mr. Cliff as came and
built the big stables at the Warrens.  Why, they're stables four times
as big as Squire Cass's, for he thought o' nothing but hosses and
hunting, Cliff didn't--a Lunnon tailor, some folks said, as had gone
mad wi' cheating.  For he couldn't ride; lor bless you!  they said he'd
got no more grip o' the hoss than if his legs had been cross-sticks: my
grandfather heared old Squire Cass say so many and many a time.  But
ride he would, as if Old Harry had been a-driving him; and he'd a son,
a lad o' sixteen; and nothing would his father have him do, but he must
ride and ride--though the lad was frighted, they said.  And it was a
common saying as the father wanted to ride the tailor out o' the lad,
and make a gentleman on him--not but what I'm a tailor myself, but in
respect as God made me such, I'm proud on it, for "Macey, tailor", 's
been wrote up over our door since afore the Queen's heads went out on
the shillings. But Cliff, he was ashamed o' being called a tailor, and
he was sore vexed as his riding was laughed at, and nobody o' the
gentlefolks hereabout could abide him.  Howsomever, the poor lad got
sickly and died, and the father didn't live long after him, for he got
queerer nor ever, and they said he used to go out i' the dead o' the
night, wi' a lantern in his hand, to the stables, and set a lot o'
lights burning, for he got as he couldn't sleep; and there he'd stand,
cracking his whip and looking at his hosses; and they said it was a
mercy as the stables didn't get burnt down wi' the poor dumb creaturs
in 'em.  But at last he died raving, and they found as he'd left all
his property, Warrens and all, to a Lunnon Charity, and that's how the
Warrens come to be Charity Land; though, as for the stables, Mr.
Lammeter never uses 'em--they're out o' all charicter--lor bless you!
if you was to set the doors a-banging in 'em, it 'ud sound like thunder
half o'er the parish."

"Aye, but there's more going on in the stables than what folks see by
daylight, eh, Mr. Macey?"  said the landlord.

"Aye, aye; go that way of a dark night, that's all," said Mr. Macey,
winking mysteriously, "and then make believe, if you like, as you
didn't see lights i' the stables, nor hear the stamping o' the hosses,
nor the cracking o' the whips, and howling, too, if it's tow'rt
daybreak.  "Cliff's Holiday" has been the name of it ever sin' I were a
boy; that's to say, some said as it was the holiday Old Harry gev him
from roasting, like.  That's what my father told me, and he was a
reasonable man, though there's folks nowadays know what happened afore
they were born better nor they know their own business."

"What do you say to that, eh, Dowlas?"  said the landlord, turning to
the farrier, who was swelling with impatience for his cue. "There's a
nut for _you_ to crack."

Mr. Dowlas was the negative spirit in the company, and was proud of his
position.

"Say?  I say what a man _should_ say as doesn't shut his eyes to look
at a finger-post.  I say, as I'm ready to wager any man ten pound, if
he'll stand out wi' me any dry night in the pasture before the Warren
stables, as we shall neither see lights nor hear noises, if it isn't
the blowing of our own noses.  That's what I say, and I've said it many
a time; but there's nobody 'ull ventur a ten-pun' note on their ghos'es
as they make so sure of."

"Why, Dowlas, that's easy betting, that is," said Ben Winthrop. "You
might as well bet a man as he wouldn't catch the rheumatise if he stood
up to 's neck in the pool of a frosty night.  It 'ud be fine fun for a
man to win his bet as he'd catch the rheumatise. Folks as believe in
Cliff's Holiday aren't agoing to ventur near it for a matter o' ten
pound."

"If Master Dowlas wants to know the truth on it," said Mr. Macey, with
a sarcastic smile, tapping his thumbs together, "he's no call to lay
any bet--let him go and stan' by himself--there's nobody 'ull hinder
him; and then he can let the parish'ners know if they're wrong."

"Thank you!  I'm obliged to you," said the farrier, with a snort of
scorn.  "If folks are fools, it's no business o' mine.  _I_ don't want
to make out the truth about ghos'es: I know it a'ready. But I'm not
against a bet--everything fair and open.  Let any man bet me ten pound
as I shall see Cliff's Holiday, and I'll go and stand by myself.  I
want no company.  I'd as lief do it as I'd fill this pipe."

"Ah, but who's to watch you, Dowlas, and see you do it?  That's no fair
bet," said the butcher.

"No fair bet?"  replied Mr. Dowlas, angrily.  "I should like to hear
any man stand up and say I want to bet unfair.  Come now, Master Lundy,
I should like to hear you say it."

"Very like you would," said the butcher.  "But it's no business o'
mine.  You're none o' my bargains, and I aren't a-going to try and
'bate your price.  If anybody 'll bid for you at your own vallying, let
him.  I'm for peace and quietness, I am."

"Yes, that's what every yapping cur is, when you hold a stick up at
him," said the farrier.  "But I'm afraid o' neither man nor ghost, and
I'm ready to lay a fair bet.  _I_ aren't a turn-tail cur."

"Aye, but there's this in it, Dowlas," said the landlord, speaking in a
tone of much candour and tolerance.  "There's folks, i' my opinion,
they can't see ghos'es, not if they stood as plain as a pike-staff
before 'em.  And there's reason i' that.  For there's my wife, now,
can't smell, not if she'd the strongest o' cheese under her nose.  I
never see'd a ghost myself; but then I says to myself, "Very like I
haven't got the smell for 'em."  I mean, putting a ghost for a smell,
or else contrairiways.  And so, I'm for holding with both sides; for,
as I say, the truth lies between 'em.  And if Dowlas was to go and
stand, and say he'd never seen a wink o' Cliff's Holiday all the night
through, I'd back him; and if anybody said as Cliff's Holiday was
certain sure, for all that, I'd back _him_ too.  For the smell's what I
go by."

The landlord's analogical argument was not well received by the
farrier--a man intensely opposed to compromise.

"Tut, tut," he said, setting down his glass with refreshed irritation;
"what's the smell got to do with it?  Did ever a ghost give a man a
black eye?  That's what I should like to know.  If ghos'es want me to
believe in 'em, let 'em leave off skulking i' the dark and i' lone
places--let 'em come where there's company and candles."

"As if ghos'es 'ud want to be believed in by anybody so ignirant!" said
Mr. Macey, in deep disgust at the farrier's crass incompetence to
apprehend the conditions of ghostly phenomena.



CHAPTER VII

Yet the next moment there seemed to be some evidence that ghosts had a
more condescending disposition than Mr. Macey attributed to them; for
the pale thin figure of Silas Marner was suddenly seen standing in the
warm light, uttering no word, but looking round at the company with his
strange unearthly eyes.  The long pipes gave a simultaneous movement,
like the antennae of startled insects, and every man present, not
excepting even the sceptical farrier, had an impression that he saw,
not Silas Marner in the flesh, but an apparition; for the door by which
Silas had entered was hidden by the high-screened seats, and no one had
noticed his approach. Mr. Macey, sitting a long way off the ghost,
might be supposed to have felt an argumentative triumph, which would
tend to neutralize his share of the general alarm.  Had he not always
said that when Silas Marner was in that strange trance of his, his soul
went loose from his body?  Here was the demonstration: nevertheless, on
the whole, he would have been as well contented without it.  For a few
moments there was a dead silence, Marner's want of breath and agitation
not allowing him to speak.  The landlord, under the habitual sense that
he was bound to keep his house open to all company, and confident in
the protection of his unbroken neutrality, at last took on himself the
task of adjuring the ghost.

"Master Marner," he said, in a conciliatory tone, "what's lacking to
you?  What's your business here?"

"Robbed!"  said Silas, gaspingly.  "I've been robbed!  I want the
constable--and the Justice--and Squire Cass--and Mr. Crackenthorp."

"Lay hold on him, Jem Rodney," said the landlord, the idea of a ghost
subsiding; "he's off his head, I doubt.  He's wet through."

Jem Rodney was the outermost man, and sat conveniently near Marner's
standing-place; but he declined to give his services.

"Come and lay hold on him yourself, Mr. Snell, if you've a mind," said
Jem, rather sullenly.  "He's been robbed, and murdered too, for what I
know," he added, in a muttering tone.

"Jem Rodney!"  said Silas, turning and fixing his strange eyes on the
suspected man.

"Aye, Master Marner, what do you want wi' me?"  said Jem, trembling a
little, and seizing his drinking-can as a defensive weapon.

"If it was you stole my money," said Silas, clasping his hands
entreatingly, and raising his voice to a cry, "give it me back--and I
won't meddle with you.  I won't set the constable on you. Give it me
back, and I'll let you--I'll let you have a guinea."

"Me stole your money!"  said Jem, angrily.  "I'll pitch this can at
your eye if you talk o' _my_ stealing your money."

"Come, come, Master Marner," said the landlord, now rising resolutely,
and seizing Marner by the shoulder, "if you've got any information to
lay, speak it out sensible, and show as you're in your right mind, if
you expect anybody to listen to you.  You're as wet as a drownded rat.
Sit down and dry yourself, and speak straight forrard."

"Ah, to be sure, man," said the farrier, who began to feel that he had
not been quite on a par with himself and the occasion.  "Let's have no
more staring and screaming, else we'll have you strapped for a madman.
That was why I didn't speak at the first--thinks I, the man's run mad."

"Aye, aye, make him sit down," said several voices at once, well
pleased that the reality of ghosts remained still an open question.

The landlord forced Marner to take off his coat, and then to sit down
on a chair aloof from every one else, in the centre of the circle and
in the direct rays of the fire.  The weaver, too feeble to have any
distinct purpose beyond that of getting help to recover his money,
submitted unresistingly.  The transient fears of the company were now
forgotten in their strong curiosity, and all faces were turned towards
Silas, when the landlord, having seated himself again, said--

