"Now then, Master Marner, what's this you've got to say--as you've been
robbed?  Speak out."

"He'd better not say again as it was me robbed him," cried Jem Rodney,
hastily.  "What could I ha' done with his money?  I could as easy steal
the parson's surplice, and wear it."

"Hold your tongue, Jem, and let's hear what he's got to say," said the
landlord.  "Now then, Master Marner."

Silas now told his story, under frequent questioning as the mysterious
character of the robbery became evident.

This strangely novel situation of opening his trouble to his Raveloe
neighbours, of sitting in the warmth of a hearth not his own, and
feeling the presence of faces and voices which were his nearest promise
of help, had doubtless its influence on Marner, in spite of his
passionate preoccupation with his loss.  Our consciousness rarely
registers the beginning of a growth within us any more than without us:
there have been many circulations of the sap before we detect the
smallest sign of the bud.

The slight suspicion with which his hearers at first listened to him,
gradually melted away before the convincing simplicity of his distress:
it was impossible for the neighbours to doubt that Marner was telling
the truth, not because they were capable of arguing at once from the
nature of his statements to the absence of any motive for making them
falsely, but because, as Mr. Macey observed, "Folks as had the devil to
back 'em were not likely to be so mushed" as poor Silas was.  Rather,
from the strange fact that the robber had left no traces, and had
happened to know the nick of time, utterly incalculable by mortal
agents, when Silas would go away from home without locking his door,
the more probable conclusion seemed to be, that his disreputable
intimacy in that quarter, if it ever existed, had been broken up, and
that, in consequence, this ill turn had been done to Marner by somebody
it was quite in vain to set the constable after.  Why this
preternatural felon should be obliged to wait till the door was left
unlocked, was a question which did not present itself.

"It isn't Jem Rodney as has done this work, Master Marner," said the
landlord.  "You mustn't be a-casting your eye at poor Jem. There may be
a bit of a reckoning against Jem for the matter of a hare or so, if
anybody was bound to keep their eyes staring open, and niver to wink;
but Jem's been a-sitting here drinking his can, like the decentest man
i' the parish, since before you left your house, Master Marner, by your
own account."

"Aye, aye," said Mr. Macey; "let's have no accusing o' the innicent.
That isn't the law.  There must be folks to swear again' a man before
he can be ta'en up.  Let's have no accusing o' the innicent, Master
Marner."

Memory was not so utterly torpid in Silas that it could not be awakened
by these words.  With a movement of compunction as new and strange to
him as everything else within the last hour, he started from his chair
and went close up to Jem, looking at him as if he wanted to assure
himself of the expression in his face.

"I was wrong," he said--"yes, yes--I ought to have thought. There's
nothing to witness against you, Jem.  Only you'd been into my house
oftener than anybody else, and so you came into my head. I don't accuse
you--I won't accuse anybody--only," he added, lifting up his hands to
his head, and turning away with bewildered misery, "I try--I try to
think where my guineas can be."

"Aye, aye, they're gone where it's hot enough to melt 'em, I doubt,"
said Mr. Macey.

"Tchuh!"  said the farrier.  And then he asked, with a cross-examining
air, "How much money might there be in the bags, Master Marner?"

"Two hundred and seventy-two pounds, twelve and sixpence, last night
when I counted it," said Silas, seating himself again, with a groan.

"Pooh!  why, they'd be none so heavy to carry.  Some tramp's been in,
that's all; and as for the no footmarks, and the bricks and the sand
being all right--why, your eyes are pretty much like a insect's, Master
Marner; they're obliged to look so close, you can't see much at a time.
It's my opinion as, if I'd been you, or you'd been me--for it comes to
the same thing--you wouldn't have thought you'd found everything as you
left it.  But what I vote is, as two of the sensiblest o' the company
should go with you to Master Kench, the constable's--he's ill i' bed, I
know that much--and get him to appoint one of us his deppity; for
that's the law, and I don't think anybody 'ull take upon him to
contradick me there.  It isn't much of a walk to Kench's; and then, if
it's me as is deppity, I'll go back with you, Master Marner, and
examine your premises; and if anybody's got any fault to find with
that, I'll thank him to stand up and say it out like a man."

By this pregnant speech the farrier had re-established his
self-complacency, and waited with confidence to hear himself named as
one of the superlatively sensible men.

"Let us see how the night is, though," said the landlord, who also
considered himself personally concerned in this proposition.  "Why, it
rains heavy still," he said, returning from the door.

"Well, I'm not the man to be afraid o' the rain," said the farrier.
"For it'll look bad when Justice Malam hears as respectable men like us
had a information laid before 'em and took no steps."

The landlord agreed with this view, and after taking the sense of the
company, and duly rehearsing a small ceremony known in high
ecclesiastical life as the _nolo episcopari_, he consented to take on
himself the chill dignity of going to Kench's.  But to the farrier's
strong disgust, Mr. Macey now started an objection to his proposing
himself as a deputy-constable; for that oracular old gentleman,
claiming to know the law, stated, as a fact delivered to him by his
father, that no doctor could be a constable.

"And you're a doctor, I reckon, though you're only a cow-doctor--for a
fly's a fly, though it may be a hoss-fly," concluded Mr. Macey,
wondering a little at his own "'cuteness".

There was a hot debate upon this, the farrier being of course
indisposed to renounce the quality of doctor, but contending that a
doctor could be a constable if he liked--the law meant, he needn't be
one if he didn't like.  Mr. Macey thought this was nonsense, since the
law was not likely to be fonder of doctors than of other folks.
Moreover, if it was in the nature of doctors more than of other men not
to like being constables, how came Mr. Dowlas to be so eager to act in
that capacity?

"_I_ don't want to act the constable," said the farrier, driven into a
corner by this merciless reasoning; "and there's no man can say it of
me, if he'd tell the truth.  But if there's to be any jealousy and
en_vy_ing about going to Kench's in the rain, let them go as like
it--you won't get me to go, I can tell you."

By the landlord's intervention, however, the dispute was accommodated.
Mr. Dowlas consented to go as a second person disinclined to act
officially; and so poor Silas, furnished with some old coverings,
turned out with his two companions into the rain again, thinking of the
long night-hours before him, not as those do who long to rest, but as
those who expect to "watch for the morning".



CHAPTER VIII

When Godfrey Cass returned from Mrs. Osgood's party at midnight, he was
not much surprised to learn that Dunsey had not come home. Perhaps he
had not sold Wildfire, and was waiting for another chance--perhaps, on
that foggy afternoon, he had preferred housing himself at the Red Lion
at Batherley for the night, if the run had kept him in that
neighbourhood; for he was not likely to feel much concern about leaving
his brother in suspense.  Godfrey's mind was too full of Nancy
Lammeter's looks and behaviour, too full of the exasperation against
himself and his lot, which the sight of her always produced in him, for
him to give much thought to Wildfire, or to the probabilities of
Dunstan's conduct.

The next morning the whole village was excited by the story of the
robbery, and Godfrey, like every one else, was occupied in gathering
and discussing news about it, and in visiting the Stone-pits.  The rain
had washed away all possibility of distinguishing foot-marks, but a
close investigation of the spot had disclosed, in the direction
opposite to the village, a tinder-box, with a flint and steel, half
sunk in the mud.  It was not Silas's tinder-box, for the only one he
had ever had was still standing on his shelf; and the inference
generally accepted was, that the tinder-box in the ditch was somehow
connected with the robbery.  A small minority shook their heads, and
intimated their opinion that it was not a robbery to have much light
thrown on it by tinder-boxes, that Master Marner's tale had a queer
look with it, and that such things had been known as a man's doing
himself a mischief, and then setting the justice to look for the doer.
But when questioned closely as to their grounds for this opinion, and
what Master Marner had to gain by such false pretences, they only shook
their heads as before, and observed that there was no knowing what some
folks counted gain; moreover, that everybody had a right to their own
opinions, grounds or no grounds, and that the weaver, as everybody
knew, was partly crazy.  Mr. Macey, though he joined in the defence of
Marner against all suspicions of deceit, also pooh-poohed the
tinder-box; indeed, repudiated it as a rather impious suggestion,
tending to imply that everything must be done by human hands, and that
there was no power which could make away with the guineas without
moving the bricks. Nevertheless, he turned round rather sharply on Mr.
Tookey, when the zealous deputy, feeling that this was a view of the
case peculiarly suited to a parish-clerk, carried it still farther, and
doubted whether it was right to inquire into a robbery at all when the
circumstances were so mysterious.

"As if," concluded Mr. Tookey--"as if there was nothing but what could
be made out by justices and constables."

"Now, don't you be for overshooting the mark, Tookey," said Mr. Macey,
nodding his head aside admonishingly.  "That's what you're allays at;
if I throw a stone and hit, you think there's summat better than
hitting, and you try to throw a stone beyond. What I said was against
the tinder-box: I said nothing against justices and constables, for
they're o' King George's making, and it 'ud be ill-becoming a man in a
parish office to fly out again' King George."

While these discussions were going on amongst the group outside the
Rainbow, a higher consultation was being carried on within, under the
presidency of Mr. Crackenthorp, the rector, assisted by Squire Cass and
other substantial parishioners.  It had just occurred to Mr. Snell, the
landlord--he being, as he observed, a man accustomed to put two and two
together--to connect with the tinder-box, which, as deputy-constable,
he himself had had the honourable distinction of finding, certain
recollections of a pedlar who had called to drink at the house about a
month before, and had actually stated that he carried a tinder-box
about with him to light his pipe.  Here, surely, was a clue to be
followed out.  And as memory, when duly impregnated with ascertained
facts, is sometimes surprisingly fertile, Mr. Snell gradually recovered
a vivid impression of the effect produced on him by the pedlar's
countenance and conversation.  He had a "look with his eye" which fell
unpleasantly on Mr. Snell's sensitive organism.  To be sure, he didn't
say anything particular--no, except that about the tinder-box--but it
isn't what a man says, it's the way he says it. Moreover, he had a
swarthy foreignness of complexion which boded little honesty.

"Did he wear ear-rings?"  Mr. Crackenthorp wished to know, having some
acquaintance with foreign customs.

"Well--stay--let me see," said Mr. Snell, like a docile clairvoyante,
who would really not make a mistake if she could help it.  After
stretching the corners of his mouth and contracting his eyes, as if he
were trying to see the ear-rings, he appeared to give up the effort,
and said, "Well, he'd got ear-rings in his box to sell, so it's nat'ral
to suppose he might wear 'em.  But he called at every house, a'most, in
the village; there's somebody else, mayhap, saw 'em in his ears, though
I can't take upon me rightly to say."

Mr. Snell was correct in his surmise, that somebody else would remember
the pedlar's ear-rings.  For on the spread of inquiry among the
villagers it was stated with gathering emphasis, that the parson had
wanted to know whether the pedlar wore ear-rings in his ears, and an
impression was created that a great deal depended on the eliciting of
this fact.  Of course, every one who heard the question, not having any
distinct image of the pedlar as _without_ ear-rings, immediately had an
image of him _with_ ear-rings, larger or smaller, as the case might be;
and the image was presently taken for a vivid recollection, so that the
glazier's wife, a well-intentioned woman, not given to lying, and whose
house was among the cleanest in the village, was ready to declare, as
sure as ever she meant to take the sacrament the very next Christmas
that was ever coming, that she had seen big ear-rings, in the shape of
the young moon, in the pedlar's two ears; while Jinny Oates, the
cobbler's daughter, being a more imaginative person, stated not only
that she had seen them too, but that they had made her blood creep, as
it did at that very moment while there she stood.

Also, by way of throwing further light on this clue of the tinder-box,
a collection was made of all the articles purchased from the pedlar at
various houses, and carried to the Rainbow to be exhibited there.  In
fact, there was a general feeling in the village, that for the
clearing-up of this robbery there must be a great deal done at the
Rainbow, and that no man need offer his wife an excuse for going there
while it was the scene of severe public duties.

Some disappointment was felt, and perhaps a little indignation also,
when it became known that Silas Marner, on being questioned by the
Squire and the parson, had retained no other recollection of the pedlar
than that he had called at his door, but had not entered his house,
having turned away at once when Silas, holding the door ajar, had said
that he wanted nothing.  This had been Silas's testimony, though he
clutched strongly at the idea of the pedlar's being the culprit, if
only because it gave him a definite image of a whereabout for his gold
after it had been taken away from its hiding-place: he could see it now
in the pedlar's box.  But it was observed with some irritation in the
village, that anybody but a "blind creatur" like Marner would have seen
the man prowling about, for how came he to leave his tinder-box in the
ditch close by, if he hadn't been lingering there?  Doubtless, he had
made his observations when he saw Marner at the door.  Anybody might
know--and only look at him--that the weaver was a half-crazy miser.  It
was a wonder the pedlar hadn't murdered him; men of that sort, with
rings in their ears, had been known for murderers often and often;
there had been one tried at the 'sizes, not so long ago but what there
were people living who remembered it.

Godfrey Cass, indeed, entering the Rainbow during one of Mr. Snell's
frequently repeated recitals of his testimony, had treated it lightly,
stating that he himself had bought a pen-knife of the pedlar, and
thought him a merry grinning fellow enough; it was all nonsense, he
said, about the man's evil looks.  But this was spoken of in the
village as the random talk of youth, "as if it was only Mr. Snell who
had seen something odd about the pedlar!"  On the contrary, there were
at least half-a-dozen who were ready to go before Justice Malam, and
give in much more striking testimony than any the landlord could
furnish.  It was to be hoped Mr. Godfrey would not go to Tarley and
throw cold water on what Mr. Snell said there, and so prevent the
justice from drawing up a warrant.  He was suspected of intending this,
when, after mid-day, he was seen setting off on horseback in the
direction of Tarley.

But by this time Godfrey's interest in the robbery had faded before his
growing anxiety about Dunstan and Wildfire, and he was going, not to
Tarley, but to Batherley, unable to rest in uncertainty about them any
longer.  The possibility that Dunstan had played him the ugly trick of
riding away with Wildfire, to return at the end of a month, when he had
gambled away or otherwise squandered the price of the horse, was a fear
that urged itself upon him more, even, than the thought of an
accidental injury; and now that the dance at Mrs. Osgood's was past, he
was irritated with himself that he had trusted his horse to Dunstan.
Instead of trying to still his fears, he encouraged them, with that
superstitious impression which clings to us all, that if we expect evil
very strongly it is the less likely to come; and when he heard a horse
approaching at a trot, and saw a hat rising above a hedge beyond an
angle of the lane, he felt as if his conjuration had succeeded.  But no
sooner did the horse come within sight, than his heart sank again.  It
was not Wildfire; and in a few moments more he discerned that the rider
was not Dunstan, but Bryce, who pulled up to speak, with a face that
implied something disagreeable.

"Well, Mr. Godfrey, that's a lucky brother of yours, that Master
Dunsey, isn't he?"

"What do you mean?"  said Godfrey, hastily.

"Why, hasn't he been home yet?"  said Bryce.

"Home?  no.  What has happened?  Be quick.  What has he done with my
horse?"

"Ah, I thought it was yours, though he pretended you had parted with it
to him."

"Has he thrown him down and broken his knees?"  said Godfrey, flushed
with exasperation.

"Worse than that," said Bryce.  "You see, I'd made a bargain with him
to buy the horse for a hundred and twenty--a swinging price, but I
always liked the horse.  And what does he do but go and stake him--fly
at a hedge with stakes in it, atop of a bank with a ditch before it.
The horse had been dead a pretty good while when he was found.  So he
hasn't been home since, has he?"

"Home?  no," said Godfrey, "and he'd better keep away.  Confound me for
a fool!  I might have known this would be the end of it."

"Well, to tell you the truth," said Bryce, "after I'd bargained for the
horse, it did come into my head that he might be riding and selling the
horse without your knowledge, for I didn't believe it was his own.  I
knew Master Dunsey was up to his tricks sometimes. But where can he be
gone?  He's never been seen at Batherley.  He couldn't have been hurt,
for he must have walked off."

"Hurt?"  said Godfrey, bitterly.  "He'll never be hurt--he's made to
hurt other people."

"And so you _did_ give him leave to sell the horse, eh?"  said Bryce.

"Yes; I wanted to part with the horse--he was always a little too hard
in the mouth for me," said Godfrey; his pride making him wince under
the idea that Bryce guessed the sale to be a matter of necessity.  "I
was going to see after him--I thought some mischief had happened.  I'll
go back now," he added, turning the horse's head, and wishing he could
get rid of Bryce; for he felt that the long-dreaded crisis in his life
was close upon him. "You're coming on to Raveloe, aren't you?"

"Well, no, not now," said Bryce.  "I _was_ coming round there, for I
had to go to Flitton, and I thought I might as well take you in my way,
and just let you know all I knew myself about the horse. I suppose
Master Dunsey didn't like to show himself till the ill news had blown
over a bit.  He's perhaps gone to pay a visit at the Three Crowns, by
Whitbridge--I know he's fond of the house."

"Perhaps he is," said Godfrey, rather absently.  Then rousing himself,
he said, with an effort at carelessness, "We shall hear of him soon
enough, I'll be bound."

"Well, here's my turning," said Bryce, not surprised to perceive that
Godfrey was rather "down"; "so I'll bid you good-day, and wish I may
bring you better news another time."

Godfrey rode along slowly, representing to himself the scene of
confession to his father from which he felt that there was now no
longer any escape.  The revelation about the money must be made the
very next morning; and if he withheld the rest, Dunstan would be sure
to come back shortly, and, finding that he must bear the brunt of his
father's anger, would tell the whole story out of spite, even though he
had nothing to gain by it.  There was one step, perhaps, by which he
might still win Dunstan's silence and put off the evil day: he might
tell his father that he had himself spent the money paid to him by
Fowler; and as he had never been guilty of such an offence before, the
affair would blow over after a little storming. But Godfrey could not
bend himself to this.  He felt that in letting Dunstan have the money,
he had already been guilty of a breach of trust hardly less culpable
than that of spending the money directly for his own behoof; and yet
there was a distinction between the two acts which made him feel that
the one was so much more blackening than the other as to be intolerable
to him.

"I don't pretend to be a good fellow," he said to himself; "but I'm not
a scoundrel--at least, I'll stop short somewhere.  I'll bear the
consequences of what I _have_ done sooner than make believe I've done
what I never would have done.  I'd never have spent the money for my
own pleasure--I was tortured into it."

Through the remainder of this day Godfrey, with only occasional
fluctuations, kept his will bent in the direction of a complete avowal
to his father, and he withheld the story of Wildfire's loss till the
next morning, that it might serve him as an introduction to heavier
matter.  The old Squire was accustomed to his son's frequent absence
from home, and thought neither Dunstan's nor Wildfire's non-appearance
a matter calling for remark.  Godfrey said to himself again and again,
that if he let slip this one opportunity of confession, he might never
have another; the revelation might be made even in a more odious way
than by Dunstan's malignity: _she_ might come as she had threatened to
do.  And then he tried to make the scene easier to himself by
rehearsal: he made up his mind how he would pass from the admission of
his weakness in letting Dunstan have the money to the fact that Dunstan
had a hold on him which he had been unable to shake off, and how he
would work up his father to expect something very bad before he told
him the fact.  The old Squire was an implacable man: he made
resolutions in violent anger, and he was not to be moved from them
after his anger had subsided--as fiery volcanic matters cool and harden
into rock.  Like many violent and implacable men, he allowed evils to
grow under favour of his own heedlessness, till they pressed upon him
with exasperating force, and then he turned round with fierce severity
and became unrelentingly hard.  This was his system with his tenants:
he allowed them to get into arrears, neglect their fences, reduce their
stock, sell their straw, and otherwise go the wrong way,--and then,
when he became short of money in consequence of this indulgence, he
took the hardest measures and would listen to no appeal.  Godfrey knew
all this, and felt it with the greater force because he had constantly
suffered annoyance from witnessing his father's sudden fits of
unrelentingness, for which his own habitual irresolution deprived him
of all sympathy.  (He was not critical on the faulty indulgence which
preceded these fits; _that_ seemed to him natural enough.)  Still there
was just the chance, Godfrey thought, that his father's pride might see
this marriage in a light that would induce him to hush it up, rather
than turn his son out and make the family the talk of the country for
ten miles round.

This was the view of the case that Godfrey managed to keep before him
pretty closely till midnight, and he went to sleep thinking that he had
done with inward debating.  But when he awoke in the still morning
darkness he found it impossible to reawaken his evening thoughts; it
was as if they had been tired out and were not to be roused to further
work.  Instead of arguments for confession, he could now feel the
presence of nothing but its evil consequences: the old dread of
disgrace came back--the old shrinking from the thought of raising a
hopeless barrier between himself and Nancy--the old disposition to rely
on chances which might be favourable to him, and save him from
betrayal.  Why, after all, should he cut off the hope of them by his
own act?  He had seen the matter in a wrong light yesterday.  He had
been in a rage with Dunstan, and had thought of nothing but a thorough
break-up of their mutual understanding; but what it would be really
wisest for him to do, was to try and soften his father's anger against
Dunsey, and keep things as nearly as possible in their old condition.
If Dunsey did not come back for a few days (and Godfrey did not know
but that the rascal had enough money in his pocket to enable him to
keep away still longer), everything might blow over.



CHAPTER IX

Godfrey rose and took his own breakfast earlier than usual, but
lingered in the wainscoted parlour till his younger brothers had
finished their meal and gone out; awaiting his father, who always took
a walk with his managing-man before breakfast.  Every one breakfasted
at a different hour in the Red House, and the Squire was always the
latest, giving a long chance to a rather feeble morning appetite before
he tried it.  The table had been spread with substantial eatables
nearly two hours before he presented himself--a tall, stout man of
sixty, with a face in which the knit brow and rather hard glance seemed
contradicted by the slack and feeble mouth.  His person showed marks of
habitual neglect, his dress was slovenly; and yet there was something
in the presence of the old Squire distinguishable from that of the
ordinary farmers in the parish, who were perhaps every whit as refined
as he, but, having slouched their way through life with a consciousness
of being in the vicinity of their "betters", wanted that
self-possession and authoritativeness of voice and carriage which
belonged to a man who thought of superiors as remote existences with
whom he had personally little more to do than with America or the
stars.  The Squire had been used to parish homage all his life, used to
the presupposition that his family, his tankards, and everything that
was his, were the oldest and best; and as he never associated with any
gentry higher than himself, his opinion was not disturbed by comparison.

He glanced at his son as he entered the room, and said, "What, sir!
haven't _you_ had your breakfast yet?"  but there was no pleasant
morning greeting between them; not because of any unfriendliness, but
because the sweet flower of courtesy is not a growth of such homes as
the Red House.

"Yes, sir," said Godfrey, "I've had my breakfast, but I was waiting to
speak to you."

"Ah!  well," said the Squire, throwing himself indifferently into his
chair, and speaking in a ponderous coughing fashion, which was felt in
Raveloe to be a sort of privilege of his rank, while he cut a piece of
beef, and held it up before the deer-hound that had come in with him.
"Ring the bell for my ale, will you?  You youngsters' business is your
own pleasure, mostly.  There's no hurry about it for anybody but
yourselves."

The Squire's life was quite as idle as his sons', but it was a fiction
kept up by himself and his contemporaries in Raveloe that youth was
exclusively the period of folly, and that their aged wisdom was
constantly in a state of endurance mitigated by sarcasm. Godfrey
waited, before he spoke again, until the ale had been brought and the
door closed--an interval during which Fleet, the deer-hound, had
consumed enough bits of beef to make a poor man's holiday dinner.

"There's been a cursed piece of ill-luck with Wildfire," he began;
"happened the day before yesterday."

"What!  broke his knees?"  said the Squire, after taking a draught of
ale.  "I thought you knew how to ride better than that, sir. I never
threw a horse down in my life.  If I had, I might ha' whistled for
another, for _my_ father wasn't quite so ready to unstring as some
other fathers I know of.  But they must turn over a new leaf--_they_
must.  What with mortgages and arrears, I'm as short o' cash as a
roadside pauper.  And that fool Kimble says the newspaper's talking
about peace.  Why, the country wouldn't have a leg to stand on.  Prices
'ud run down like a jack, and I should never get my arrears, not if I
sold all the fellows up.  And there's that damned Fowler, I won't put
up with him any longer; I've told Winthrop to go to Cox this very day.
The lying scoundrel told me he'd be sure to pay me a hundred last
month.  He takes advantage because he's on that outlying farm, and
thinks I shall forget him."

The Squire had delivered this speech in a coughing and interrupted
manner, but with no pause long enough for Godfrey to make it a pretext
for taking up the word again.  He felt that his father meant to ward
off any request for money on the ground of the misfortune with
Wildfire, and that the emphasis he had thus been led to lay on his
shortness of cash and his arrears was likely to produce an attitude of
mind the utmost unfavourable for his own disclosure. But he must go on,
now he had begun.

"It's worse than breaking the horse's knees--he's been staked and
killed," he said, as soon as his father was silent, and had begun to
cut his meat.  "But I wasn't thinking of asking you to buy me another
horse; I was only thinking I'd lost the means of paying you with the
price of Wildfire, as I'd meant to do.  Dunsey took him to the hunt to
sell him for me the other day, and after he'd made a bargain for a
hundred and twenty with Bryce, he went after the hounds, and took some
fool's leap or other that did for the horse at once.  If it hadn't been
for that, I should have paid you a hundred pounds this morning."

The Squire had laid down his knife and fork, and was staring at his son
in amazement, not being sufficiently quick of brain to form a probable
guess as to what could have caused so strange an inversion of the
paternal and filial relations as this proposition of his son to pay him
a hundred pounds.

"The truth is, sir--I'm very sorry--I was quite to blame," said
Godfrey.  "Fowler did pay that hundred pounds.  He paid it to me, when
I was over there one day last month.  And Dunsey bothered me for the
money, and I let him have it, because I hoped I should be able to pay
it you before this."

The Squire was purple with anger before his son had done speaking, and
found utterance difficult.  "You let Dunsey have it, sir?  And how long
have you been so thick with Dunsey that you must _collogue_ with him to
embezzle my money?  Are you turning out a scamp?  I tell you I won't
have it.  I'll turn the whole pack of you out of the house together,
and marry again.  I'd have you to remember, sir, my property's got no
entail on it;--since my grandfather's time the Casses can do as they
like with their land.  Remember that, sir. Let Dunsey have the money!
Why should you let Dunsey have the money?  There's some lie at the
bottom of it."

"There's no lie, sir," said Godfrey.  "I wouldn't have spent the money
myself, but Dunsey bothered me, and I was a fool, and let him have it.
But I meant to pay it, whether he did or not.  That's the whole story.
I never meant to embezzle money, and I'm not the man to do it.  You
never knew me do a dishonest trick, sir."

"Where's Dunsey, then?  What do you stand talking there for?  Go and
fetch Dunsey, as I tell you, and let him give account of what he wanted
the money for, and what he's done with it.  He shall repent it.  I'll
turn him out.  I said I would, and I'll do it.  He shan't brave me.  Go
and fetch him."

"Dunsey isn't come back, sir."

"What!  did he break his own neck, then?"  said the Squire, with some
disgust at the idea that, in that case, he could not fulfil his threat.

"No, he wasn't hurt, I believe, for the horse was found dead, and
Dunsey must have walked off.  I daresay we shall see him again
by-and-by.  I don't know where he is."

"And what must you be letting him have my money for?  Answer me that,"
said the Squire, attacking Godfrey again, since Dunsey was not within
reach.

"Well, sir, I don't know," said Godfrey, hesitatingly.  That was a
feeble evasion, but Godfrey was not fond of lying, and, not being
sufficiently aware that no sort of duplicity can long flourish without
the help of vocal falsehoods, he was quite unprepared with invented
motives.

"You don't know?  I tell you what it is, sir.  You've been up to some
trick, and you've been bribing him not to tell," said the Squire, with
a sudden acuteness which startled Godfrey, who felt his heart beat
violently at the nearness of his father's guess.  The sudden alarm
pushed him on to take the next step--a very slight impulse suffices for
that on a downward road.

"Why, sir," he said, trying to speak with careless ease, "it was a
little affair between me and Dunsey; it's no matter to anybody else.
It's hardly worth while to pry into young men's fooleries: it wouldn't
have made any difference to you, sir, if I'd not had the bad luck to
lose Wildfire.  I should have paid you the money."

"Fooleries!  Pshaw!  it's time you'd done with fooleries.  And I'd have
you know, sir, you _must_ ha' done with 'em," said the Squire, frowning
and casting an angry glance at his son.  "Your goings-on are not what I
shall find money for any longer.  There's my grandfather had his
stables full o' horses, and kept a good house, too, and in worse times,
by what I can make out; and so might I, if I hadn't four
good-for-nothing fellows to hang on me like horse-leeches.  I've been
too good a father to you all--that's what it is.  But I shall pull up,
sir."

Godfrey was silent.  He was not likely to be very penetrating in his
judgments, but he had always had a sense that his father's indulgence
had not been kindness, and had had a vague longing for some discipline
that would have checked his own errant weakness and helped his better
will.  The Squire ate his bread and meat hastily, took a deep draught
of ale, then turned his chair from the table, and began to speak again.

"It'll be all the worse for you, you know--you'd need try and help me
keep things together."

"Well, sir, I've often offered to take the management of things, but
you know you've taken it ill always, and seemed to think I wanted to
push you out of your place."

"I know nothing o' your offering or o' my taking it ill," said the
Squire, whose memory consisted in certain strong impressions unmodified
by detail; "but I know, one while you seemed to be thinking o'
marrying, and I didn't offer to put any obstacles in your way, as some
fathers would.  I'd as lieve you married Lammeter's daughter as
anybody.  I suppose, if I'd said you nay, you'd ha' kept on with it;
but, for want o' contradiction, you've changed your mind.  You're a
shilly-shally fellow: you take after your poor mother.  She never had a
will of her own; a woman has no call for one, if she's got a proper man
for her husband.  But _your_ wife had need have one, for you hardly
know your own mind enough to make both your legs walk one way.  The
lass hasn't said downright she won't have you, has she?"

"No," said Godfrey, feeling very hot and uncomfortable; "but I don't
think she will."

"Think!  why haven't you the courage to ask her?  Do you stick to it,
you want to have _her_--that's the thing?"

"There's no other woman I want to marry," said Godfrey, evasively.

"Well, then, let me make the offer for you, that's all, if you haven't
the pluck to do it yourself.  Lammeter isn't likely to be loath for his
daughter to marry into _my_ family, I should think. And as for the
pretty lass, she wouldn't have her cousin--and there's nobody else, as
I see, could ha' stood in your way."

"I'd rather let it be, please sir, at present," said Godfrey, in alarm.
"I think she's a little offended with me just now, and I should like to
speak for myself.  A man must manage these things for himself."

"Well, speak, then, and manage it, and see if you can't turn over a new
leaf.  That's what a man must do when he thinks o' marrying."

"I don't see how I can think of it at present, sir.  You wouldn't like
to settle me on one of the farms, I suppose, and I don't think she'd
come to live in this house with all my brothers.  It's a different sort
of life to what she's been used to."

"Not come to live in this house?  Don't tell me.  You ask her, that's
all," said the Squire, with a short, scornful laugh.

"I'd rather let the thing be, at present, sir," said Godfrey.  "I hope
you won't try to hurry it on by saying anything."

"I shall do what I choose," said the Squire, "and I shall let you know
I'm master; else you may turn out and find an estate to drop into
somewhere else.  Go out and tell Winthrop not to go to Cox's, but wait
for me.  And tell 'em to get my horse saddled.  And stop: look out and
get that hack o' Dunsey's sold, and hand me the money, will you?  He'll
keep no more hacks at my expense.  And if you know where he's
sneaking--I daresay you do--you may tell him to spare himself the
journey o' coming back home.  Let him turn ostler, and keep himself.
He shan't hang on me any more."

"I don't know where he is, sir; and if I did, it isn't my place to tell
him to keep away," said Godfrey, moving towards the door.

"Confound it, sir, don't stay arguing, but go and order my horse," said
the Squire, taking up a pipe.

Godfrey left the room, hardly knowing whether he were more relieved by
the sense that the interview was ended without having made any change
in his position, or more uneasy that he had entangled himself still
further in prevarication and deceit.  What had passed about his
proposing to Nancy had raised a new alarm, lest by some after-dinner
words of his father's to Mr. Lammeter he should be thrown into the
embarrassment of being obliged absolutely to decline her when she
seemed to be within his reach.  He fled to his usual refuge, that of
hoping for some unforeseen turn of fortune, some favourable chance
which would save him from unpleasant consequences--perhaps even justify
his insincerity by manifesting its prudence. And in this point of
trusting to some throw of fortune's dice, Godfrey can hardly be called
specially old-fashioned.  Favourable Chance, I fancy, is the god of all
men who follow their own devices instead of obeying a law they believe
in.  Let even a polished man of these days get into a position he is
ashamed to avow, and his mind will be bent on all the possible issues
that may deliver him from the calculable results of that position.  Let
him live outside his income, or shirk the resolute honest work that
brings wages, and he will presently find himself dreaming of a possible
benefactor, a possible simpleton who may be cajoled into using his
interest, a possible state of mind in some possible person not yet
forthcoming. Let him neglect the responsibilities of his office, and he
will inevitably anchor himself on the chance that the thing left undone
may turn out not to be of the supposed importance.  Let him betray his
friend's confidence, and he will adore that same cunning complexity
called Chance, which gives him the hope that his friend will never
know.  Let him forsake a decent craft that he may pursue the
gentilities of a profession to which nature never called him, and his
religion will infallibly be the worship of blessed Chance, which he
will believe in as the mighty creator of success.  The evil principle
deprecated in that religion is the orderly sequence by which the seed
brings forth a crop after its kind.



CHAPTER X

Justice Malam was naturally regarded in Tarley and Raveloe as a man of
capacious mind, seeing that he could draw much wider conclusions
without evidence than could be expected of his neighbours who were not
on the Commission of the Peace.  Such a man was not likely to neglect
the clue of the tinder-box, and an inquiry was set on foot concerning a
pedlar, name unknown, with curly black hair and a foreign complexion,
carrying a box of cutlery and jewellery, and wearing large rings in his
ears.  But either because inquiry was too slow-footed to overtake him,
or because the description applied to so many pedlars that inquiry did
not know how to choose among them, weeks passed away, and there was no
other result concerning the robbery than a gradual cessation of the
excitement it had caused in Raveloe.  Dunstan Cass's absence was hardly
a subject of remark: he had once before had a quarrel with his father,
and had gone off, nobody knew whither, to return at the end of six
weeks, take up his old quarters unforbidden, and swagger as usual.  His
own family, who equally expected this issue, with the sole difference
that the Squire was determined this time to forbid him the old
quarters, never mentioned his absence; and when his uncle Kimble or Mr.
Osgood noticed it, the story of his having killed Wildfire, and
committed some offence against his father, was enough to prevent
surprise.  To connect the fact of Dunsey's disappearance with that of
the robbery occurring on the same day, lay quite away from the track of
every one's thought--even Godfrey's, who had better reason than any one
else to know what his brother was capable of.  He remembered no mention
of the weaver between them since the time, twelve years ago, when it
was their boyish sport to deride him; and, besides, his imagination
constantly created an _alibi_ for Dunstan: he saw him continually in
some congenial haunt, to which he had walked off on leaving
Wildfire--saw him sponging on chance acquaintances, and meditating a
return home to the old amusement of tormenting his elder brother.  Even
if any brain in Raveloe had put the said two facts together, I doubt
whether a combination so injurious to the prescriptive respectability
of a family with a mural monument and venerable tankards, would not
have been suppressed as of unsound tendency.  But Christmas puddings,
brawn, and abundance of spirituous liquors, throwing the mental
originality into the channel of nightmare, are great preservatives
against a dangerous spontaneity of waking thought.

When the robbery was talked of at the Rainbow and elsewhere, in good
company, the balance continued to waver between the rational
explanation founded on the tinder-box, and the theory of an
impenetrable mystery that mocked investigation.  The advocates of the
tinder-box-and-pedlar view considered the other side a muddle-headed
and credulous set, who, because they themselves were wall-eyed,
supposed everybody else to have the same blank outlook; and the
adherents of the inexplicable more than hinted that their antagonists
were animals inclined to crow before they had found any corn--mere
skimming-dishes in point of depth--whose clear-sightedness consisted in
supposing there was nothing behind a barn-door because they couldn't
see through it; so that, though their controversy did not serve to
elicit the fact concerning the robbery, it elicited some true opinions
of collateral importance.

But while poor Silas's loss served thus to brush the slow current of
Raveloe conversation, Silas himself was feeling the withering
desolation of that bereavement about which his neighbours were arguing
at their ease.  To any one who had observed him before he lost his
gold, it might have seemed that so withered and shrunken a life as his
could hardly be susceptible of a bruise, could hardly endure any
subtraction but such as would put an end to it altogether.  But in
reality it had been an eager life, filled with immediate purpose which
fenced him in from the wide, cheerless unknown.  It had been a clinging
life; and though the object round which its fibres had clung was a dead
disrupted thing, it satisfied the need for clinging.  But now the fence
was broken down--the support was snatched away.  Marner's thoughts
could no longer move in their old round, and were baffled by a blank
like that which meets a plodding ant when the earth has broken away on
its homeward path.  The loom was there, and the weaving, and the
growing pattern in the cloth; but the bright treasure in the hole under
his feet was gone; the prospect of handling and counting it was gone:
the evening had no phantasm of delight to still the poor soul's
craving.  The thought of the money he would get by his actual work
could bring no joy, for its meagre image was only a fresh reminder of
his loss; and hope was too heavily crushed by the sudden blow for his
imagination to dwell on the growth of a new hoard from that small
beginning.

He filled up the blank with grief.  As he sat weaving, he every now and
then moaned low, like one in pain: it was the sign that his thoughts
had come round again to the sudden chasm--to the empty evening-time.
And all the evening, as he sat in his loneliness by his dull fire, he
leaned his elbows on his knees, and clasped his head with his hands,
and moaned very low--not as one who seeks to be heard.

And yet he was not utterly forsaken in his trouble.  The repulsion
Marner had always created in his neighbours was partly dissipated by
the new light in which this misfortune had shown him.  Instead of a man
who had more cunning than honest folks could come by, and, what was
worse, had not the inclination to use that cunning in a neighbourly
way, it was now apparent that Silas had not cunning enough to keep his
own.  He was generally spoken of as a "poor mushed creatur"; and that
avoidance of his neighbours, which had before been referred to his
ill-will and to a probable addiction to worse company, was now
considered mere craziness.

This change to a kindlier feeling was shown in various ways.  The odour
of Christmas cooking being on the wind, it was the season when
superfluous pork and black puddings are suggestive of charity in
well-to-do families; and Silas's misfortune had brought him uppermost
in the memory of housekeepers like Mrs. Osgood. Mr. Crackenthorp, too,
while he admonished Silas that his money had probably been taken from
him because he thought too much of it and never came to church,
enforced the doctrine by a present of pigs' pettitoes, well calculated
to dissipate unfounded prejudices against the clerical character.
Neighbours who had nothing but verbal consolation to give showed a
disposition not only to greet Silas and discuss his misfortune at some
length when they encountered him in the village, but also to take the
trouble of calling at his cottage and getting him to repeat all the
details on the very spot; and then they would try to cheer him by
saying, "Well, Master Marner, you're no worse off nor other poor folks,
after all; and if you was to be crippled, the parish 'ud give you a
'lowance."

I suppose one reason why we are seldom able to comfort our neighbours
with our words is that our goodwill gets adulterated, in spite of
ourselves, before it can pass our lips.  We can send black puddings and
pettitoes without giving them a flavour of our own egoism; but language
is a stream that is almost sure to smack of a mingled soil.  There was
a fair proportion of kindness in Raveloe; but it was often of a beery
and bungling sort, and took the shape least allied to the complimentary
and hypocritical.

Mr. Macey, for example, coming one evening expressly to let Silas know
that recent events had given him the advantage of standing more
favourably in the opinion of a man whose judgment was not formed
lightly, opened the conversation by saying, as soon as he had seated
himself and adjusted his thumbs--

"Come, Master Marner, why, you've no call to sit a-moaning.  You're a
deal better off to ha' lost your money, nor to ha' kep it by foul
means.  I used to think, when you first come into these parts, as you
were no better nor you should be; you were younger a deal than what you
are now; but you were allays a staring, white-faced creatur, partly
like a bald-faced calf, as I may say.  But there's no knowing: it isn't
every queer-looksed thing as Old Harry's had the making of--I mean,
speaking o' toads and such; for they're often harmless, like, and
useful against varmin.  And it's pretty much the same wi' you, as fur
as I can see.  Though as to the yarbs and stuff to cure the breathing,
if you brought that sort o' knowledge from distant parts, you might ha'
been a bit freer of it. And if the knowledge wasn't well come by, why,
you might ha' made up for it by coming to church reg'lar; for, as for
the children as the Wise Woman charmed, I've been at the christening of
'em again and again, and they took the water just as well.  And that's
reasonable; for if Old Harry's a mind to do a bit o' kindness for a
holiday, like, who's got anything against it?  That's my thinking; and
I've been clerk o' this parish forty year, and I know, when the parson
and me does the cussing of a Ash Wednesday, there's no cussing o' folks
as have a mind to be cured without a doctor, let Kimble say what he
will.  And so, Master Marner, as I was saying--for there's windings i'
things as they may carry you to the fur end o' the prayer-book afore
you get back to 'em--my advice is, as you keep up your sperrits; for as
for thinking you're a deep un, and ha' got more inside you nor 'ull
bear daylight, I'm not o' that opinion at all, and so I tell the
neighbours.  For, says I, you talk o' Master Marner making out a
tale--why, it's nonsense, that is: it 'ud take a 'cute man to make a
tale like that; and, says I, he looked as scared as a rabbit."

During this discursive address Silas had continued motionless in his
previous attitude, leaning his elbows on his knees, and pressing his
hands against his head.  Mr. Macey, not doubting that he had been
listened to, paused, in the expectation of some appreciatory reply, but
Marner remained silent.  He had a sense that the old man meant to be
good-natured and neighbourly; but the kindness fell on him as sunshine
falls on the wretched--he had no heart to taste it, and felt that it
was very far off him.

"Come, Master Marner, have you got nothing to say to that?"  said Mr.
Macey at last, with a slight accent of impatience.

"Oh," said Marner, slowly, shaking his head between his hands, "I thank
you--thank you--kindly."

"Aye, aye, to be sure: I thought you would," said Mr. Macey; "and my
advice is--have you got a Sunday suit?"

"No," said Marner.

"I doubted it was so," said Mr. Macey.  "Now, let me advise you to get
a Sunday suit: there's Tookey, he's a poor creatur, but he's got my
tailoring business, and some o' my money in it, and he shall make a
suit at a low price, and give you trust, and then you can come to
church, and be a bit neighbourly.  Why, you've never heared me say
"Amen" since you come into these parts, and I recommend you to lose no
time, for it'll be poor work when Tookey has it all to himself, for I
mayn't be equil to stand i' the desk at all, come another winter."
Here Mr. Macey paused, perhaps expecting some sign of emotion in his
hearer; but not observing any, he went on. "And as for the money for
the suit o' clothes, why, you get a matter of a pound a-week at your
weaving, Master Marner, and you're a young man, eh, for all you look so
mushed.  Why, you couldn't ha' been five-and-twenty when you come into
these parts, eh?"

Silas started a little at the change to a questioning tone, and
answered mildly, "I don't know; I can't rightly say--it's a long while
since."

After receiving such an answer as this, it is not surprising that Mr.
Macey observed, later on in the evening at the Rainbow, that Marner's
head was "all of a muddle", and that it was to be doubted if he ever
knew when Sunday came round, which showed him a worse heathen than many
a dog.

Another of Silas's comforters, besides Mr. Macey, came to him with a
mind highly charged on the same topic.  This was Mrs. Winthrop, the
wheelwright's wife.  The inhabitants of Raveloe were not severely
regular in their church-going, and perhaps there was hardly a person in
the parish who would not have held that to go to church every Sunday in
the calendar would have shown a greedy desire to stand well with
Heaven, and get an undue advantage over their neighbours--a wish to be
better than the "common run", that would have implied a reflection on
those who had had godfathers and godmothers as well as themselves, and
had an equal right to the burying-service.  At the same time, it was
understood to be requisite for all who were not household servants, or
young men, to take the sacrament at one of the great festivals: Squire
Cass himself took it on Christmas-day; while those who were held to be
"good livers" went to church with greater, though still with moderate,
frequency.

Mrs. Winthrop was one of these: she was in all respects a woman of
scrupulous conscience, so eager for duties that life seemed to offer
them too scantily unless she rose at half-past four, though this threw
a scarcity of work over the more advanced hours of the morning, which
it was a constant problem with her to remove.  Yet she had not the
vixenish temper which is sometimes supposed to be a necessary condition
of such habits: she was a very mild, patient woman, whose nature it was
to seek out all the sadder and more serious elements of life, and
pasture her mind upon them.  She was the person always first thought of
in Raveloe when there was illness or death in a family, when leeches
were to be applied, or there was a sudden disappointment in a monthly
nurse.  She was a "comfortable woman"--good-looking,
fresh-complexioned, having her lips always slightly screwed, as if she
felt herself in a sick-room with the doctor or the clergyman present.
But she was never whimpering; no one had seen her shed tears; she was
simply grave and inclined to shake her head and sigh, almost
imperceptibly, like a funereal mourner who is not a relation.  It
seemed surprising that Ben Winthrop, who loved his quart-pot and his
joke, got along so well with Dolly; but she took her husband's jokes
and joviality as patiently as everything else, considering that "men
_would_ be so", and viewing the stronger sex in the light of animals
whom it had pleased Heaven to make naturally troublesome, like bulls
and turkey-cocks.

This good wholesome woman could hardly fail to have her mind drawn
strongly towards Silas Marner, now that he appeared in the light of a
sufferer; and one Sunday afternoon she took her little boy Aaron with
her, and went to call on Silas, carrying in her hand some small
lard-cakes, flat paste-like articles much esteemed in Raveloe. Aaron,
an apple-cheeked youngster of seven, with a clean starched frill which
looked like a plate for the apples, needed all his adventurous
curiosity to embolden him against the possibility that the big-eyed
weaver might do him some bodily injury; and his dubiety was much
increased when, on arriving at the Stone-pits, they heard the
mysterious sound of the loom.

"Ah, it is as I thought," said Mrs. Winthrop, sadly.

They had to knock loudly before Silas heard them; but when he did come
to the door he showed no impatience, as he would once have done, at a
visit that had been unasked for and unexpected. Formerly, his heart had
been as a locked casket with its treasure inside; but now the casket
was empty, and the lock was broken.  Left groping in darkness, with his
prop utterly gone, Silas had inevitably a sense, though a dull and
half-despairing one, that if any help came to him it must come from
without; and there was a slight stirring of expectation at the sight of
his fellow-men, a faint consciousness of dependence on their goodwill.
He opened the door wide to admit Dolly, but without otherwise returning
her greeting than by moving the armchair a few inches as a sign that
she was to sit down in it.  Dolly, as soon as she was seated, removed
the white cloth that covered her lard-cakes, and said in her gravest
way--

"I'd a baking yisterday, Master Marner, and the lard-cakes turned out
better nor common, and I'd ha' asked you to accept some, if you'd
thought well.  I don't eat such things myself, for a bit o' bread's
what I like from one year's end to the other; but men's stomichs are
made so comical, they want a change--they do, I know, God help 'em."

