Dolly sighed gently as she held out the cakes to Silas, who thanked her
kindly and looked very close at them, absently, being accustomed to
look so at everything he took into his hand--eyed all the while by the
wondering bright orbs of the small Aaron, who had made an outwork of
his mother's chair, and was peeping round from behind it.

"There's letters pricked on 'em," said Dolly.  "I can't read 'em
myself, and there's nobody, not Mr. Macey himself, rightly knows what
they mean; but they've a good meaning, for they're the same as is on
the pulpit-cloth at church.  What are they, Aaron, my dear?"

Aaron retreated completely behind his outwork.

"Oh, go, that's naughty," said his mother, mildly.  "Well, whativer the
letters are, they've a good meaning; and it's a stamp as has been in
our house, Ben says, ever since he was a little un, and his mother used
to put it on the cakes, and I've allays put it on too; for if there's
any good, we've need of it i' this world."

"It's I. H. S.," said Silas, at which proof of learning Aaron peeped
round the chair again.

"Well, to be sure, you can read 'em off," said Dolly.  "Ben's read 'em
to me many and many a time, but they slip out o' my mind again; the
more's the pity, for they're good letters, else they wouldn't be in the
church; and so I prick 'em on all the loaves and all the cakes, though
sometimes they won't hold, because o' the rising--for, as I said, if
there's any good to be got we've need of it i' this world--that we
have; and I hope they'll bring good to you, Master Marner, for it's wi'
that will I brought you the cakes; and you see the letters have held
better nor common."

Silas was as unable to interpret the letters as Dolly, but there was no
possibility of misunderstanding the desire to give comfort that made
itself heard in her quiet tones.  He said, with more feeling than
before--"Thank you--thank you kindly."  But he laid down the cakes and
seated himself absently--drearily unconscious of any distinct benefit
towards which the cakes and the letters, or even Dolly's kindness,
could tend for him.

"Ah, if there's good anywhere, we've need of it," repeated Dolly, who
did not lightly forsake a serviceable phrase.  She looked at Silas
pityingly as she went on.  "But you didn't hear the church-bells this
morning, Master Marner?  I doubt you didn't know it was Sunday.  Living
so lone here, you lose your count, I daresay; and then, when your loom
makes a noise, you can't hear the bells, more partic'lar now the frost
kills the sound."

"Yes, I did; I heard 'em," said Silas, to whom Sunday bells were a mere
accident of the day, and not part of its sacredness.  There had been no
bells in Lantern Yard.

"Dear heart!"  said Dolly, pausing before she spoke again.  "But what a
pity it is you should work of a Sunday, and not clean yourself--if you
_didn't_ go to church; for if you'd a roasting bit, it might be as you
couldn't leave it, being a lone man.  But there's the bakehus, if you
could make up your mind to spend a twopence on the oven now and
then,--not every week, in course--I shouldn't like to do that
myself,--you might carry your bit o' dinner there, for it's nothing but
right to have a bit o' summat hot of a Sunday, and not to make it as
you can't know your dinner from Saturday.  But now, upo' Christmas-day,
this blessed Christmas as is ever coming, if you was to take your
dinner to the bakehus, and go to church, and see the holly and the yew,
and hear the anthim, and then take the sacramen', you'd be a deal the
better, and you'd know which end you stood on, and you could put your
trust i' Them as knows better nor we do, seein' you'd ha' done what it
lies on us all to do."

Dolly's exhortation, which was an unusually long effort of speech for
her, was uttered in the soothing persuasive tone with which she would
have tried to prevail on a sick man to take his medicine, or a basin of
gruel for which he had no appetite.  Silas had never before been
closely urged on the point of his absence from church, which had only
been thought of as a part of his general queerness; and he was too
direct and simple to evade Dolly's appeal.

"Nay, nay," he said, "I know nothing o' church.  I've never been to
church."

"No!"  said Dolly, in a low tone of wonderment.  Then bethinking
herself of Silas's advent from an unknown country, she said, "Could it
ha' been as they'd no church where you was born?"

"Oh, yes," said Silas, meditatively, sitting in his usual posture of
leaning on his knees, and supporting his head.  "There was churches--a
many--it was a big town.  But I knew nothing of 'em--I went to chapel."

Dolly was much puzzled at this new word, but she was rather afraid of
inquiring further, lest "chapel" might mean some haunt of wickedness.
After a little thought, she said--

"Well, Master Marner, it's niver too late to turn over a new leaf, and
if you've niver had no church, there's no telling the good it'll do
you.  For I feel so set up and comfortable as niver was, when I've been
and heard the prayers, and the singing to the praise and glory o' God,
as Mr. Macey gives out--and Mr. Crackenthorp saying good words, and
more partic'lar on Sacramen' Day; and if a bit o' trouble comes, I feel
as I can put up wi' it, for I've looked for help i' the right quarter,
and gev myself up to Them as we must all give ourselves up to at the
last; and if we'n done our part, it isn't to be believed as Them as are
above us 'ull be worse nor we are, and come short o' Their'n."

Poor Dolly's exposition of her simple Raveloe theology fell rather
unmeaningly on Silas's ears, for there was no word in it that could
rouse a memory of what he had known as religion, and his comprehension
was quite baffled by the plural pronoun, which was no heresy of
Dolly's, but only her way of avoiding a presumptuous familiarity.  He
remained silent, not feeling inclined to assent to the part of Dolly's
speech which he fully understood--her recommendation that he should go
to church.  Indeed, Silas was so unaccustomed to talk beyond the brief
questions and answers necessary for the transaction of his simple
business, that words did not easily come to him without the urgency of
a distinct purpose.

But now, little Aaron, having become used to the weaver's awful
presence, had advanced to his mother's side, and Silas, seeming to
notice him for the first time, tried to return Dolly's signs of
good-will by offering the lad a bit of lard-cake.  Aaron shrank back a
little, and rubbed his head against his mother's shoulder, but still
thought the piece of cake worth the risk of putting his hand out for it.

"Oh, for shame, Aaron," said his mother, taking him on her lap,
however; "why, you don't want cake again yet awhile.  He's wonderful
hearty," she went on, with a little sigh--"that he is, God knows.  He's
my youngest, and we spoil him sadly, for either me or the father must
allays hev him in our sight--that we must."

She stroked Aaron's brown head, and thought it must do Master Marner
good to see such a "pictur of a child".  But Marner, on the other side
of the hearth, saw the neat-featured rosy face as a mere dim round,
with two dark spots in it.

"And he's got a voice like a bird--you wouldn't think," Dolly went on;
"he can sing a Christmas carril as his father's taught him; and I take
it for a token as he'll come to good, as he can learn the good tunes so
quick.  Come, Aaron, stan' up and sing the carril to Master Marner,
come."

Aaron replied by rubbing his forehead against his mother's shoulder.

"Oh, that's naughty," said Dolly, gently.  "Stan' up, when mother tells
you, and let me hold the cake till you've done."

Aaron was not indisposed to display his talents, even to an ogre, under
protecting circumstances; and after a few more signs of coyness,
consisting chiefly in rubbing the backs of his hands over his eyes, and
then peeping between them at Master Marner, to see if he looked anxious
for the "carril", he at length allowed his head to be duly adjusted,
and standing behind the table, which let him appear above it only as
far as his broad frill, so that he looked like a cherubic head
untroubled with a body, he began with a clear chirp, and in a melody
that had the rhythm of an industrious hammer

  "God rest you, merry gentlemen,
  Let nothing you dismay,
  For Jesus Christ our Savior
  Was born on Christmas-day."


Dolly listened with a devout look, glancing at Marner in some
confidence that this strain would help to allure him to church.

"That's Christmas music," she said, when Aaron had ended, and had
secured his piece of cake again.  "There's no other music equil to the
Christmas music--"Hark the erol angils sing."  And you may judge what
it is at church, Master Marner, with the bassoon and the voices, as you
can't help thinking you've got to a better place a'ready--for I
wouldn't speak ill o' this world, seeing as Them put us in it as knows
best--but what wi' the drink, and the quarrelling, and the bad
illnesses, and the hard dying, as I've seen times and times, one's
thankful to hear of a better.  The boy sings pretty, don't he, Master
Marner?"

"Yes," said Silas, absently, "very pretty."

The Christmas carol, with its hammer-like rhythm, had fallen on his
ears as strange music, quite unlike a hymn, and could have none of the
effect Dolly contemplated.  But he wanted to show her that he was
grateful, and the only mode that occurred to him was to offer Aaron a
bit more cake.

"Oh, no, thank you, Master Marner," said Dolly, holding down Aaron's
willing hands.  "We must be going home now.  And so I wish you
good-bye, Master Marner; and if you ever feel anyways bad in your
inside, as you can't fend for yourself, I'll come and clean up for you,
and get you a bit o' victual, and willing.  But I beg and pray of you
to leave off weaving of a Sunday, for it's bad for soul and body--and
the money as comes i' that way 'ull be a bad bed to lie down on at the
last, if it doesn't fly away, nobody knows where, like the white frost.
And you'll excuse me being that free with you, Master Marner, for I
wish you well--I do.  Make your bow, Aaron."

Silas said "Good-bye, and thank you kindly," as he opened the door for
Dolly, but he couldn't help feeling relieved when she was
gone--relieved that he might weave again and moan at his ease.  Her
simple view of life and its comforts, by which she had tried to cheer
him, was only like a report of unknown objects, which his imagination
could not fashion.  The fountains of human love and of faith in a
divine love had not yet been unlocked, and his soul was still the
shrunken rivulet, with only this difference, that its little groove of
sand was blocked up, and it wandered confusedly against dark
obstruction.

And so, notwithstanding the honest persuasions of Mr. Macey and Dolly
Winthrop, Silas spent his Christmas-day in loneliness, eating his meat
in sadness of heart, though the meat had come to him as a neighbourly
present.  In the morning he looked out on the black frost that seemed
to press cruelly on every blade of grass, while the half-icy red pool
shivered under the bitter wind; but towards evening the snow began to
fall, and curtained from him even that dreary outlook, shutting him
close up with his narrow grief.  And he sat in his robbed home through
the livelong evening, not caring to close his shutters or lock his
door, pressing his head between his hands and moaning, till the cold
grasped him and told him that his fire was grey.

Nobody in this world but himself knew that he was the same Silas Marner
who had once loved his fellow with tender love, and trusted in an
unseen goodness.  Even to himself that past experience had become dim.

But in Raveloe village the bells rang merrily, and the church was
fuller than all through the rest of the year, with red faces among the
abundant dark-green boughs--faces prepared for a longer service than
usual by an odorous breakfast of toast and ale.  Those green boughs,
the hymn and anthem never heard but at Christmas--even the Athanasian
Creed, which was discriminated from the others only as being longer and
of exceptional virtue, since it was only read on rare
occasions--brought a vague exulting sense, for which the grown men
could as little have found words as the children, that something great
and mysterious had been done for them in heaven above and in earth
below, which they were appropriating by their presence.  And then the
red faces made their way through the black biting frost to their own
homes, feeling themselves free for the rest of the day to eat, drink,
and be merry, and using that Christian freedom without diffidence.

At Squire Cass's family party that day nobody mentioned Dunstan--nobody
was sorry for his absence, or feared it would be too long. The doctor
and his wife, uncle and aunt Kimble, were there, and the annual
Christmas talk was carried through without any omissions, rising to the
climax of Mr. Kimble's experience when he walked the London hospitals
thirty years back, together with striking professional anecdotes then
gathered.  Whereupon cards followed, with aunt Kimble's annual failure
to follow suit, and uncle Kimble's irascibility concerning the odd
trick which was rarely explicable to him, when it was not on his side,
without a general visitation of tricks to see that they were formed on
sound principles: the whole being accompanied by a strong steaming
odour of spirits-and-water.

But the party on Christmas-day, being a strictly family party, was not
the pre-eminently brilliant celebration of the season at the Red House.
It was the great dance on New Year's Eve that made the glory of Squire
Cass's hospitality, as of his forefathers', time out of mind.  This was
the occasion when all the society of Raveloe and Tarley, whether old
acquaintances separated by long rutty distances, or cooled
acquaintances separated by misunderstandings concerning runaway calves,
or acquaintances founded on intermittent condescension, counted on
meeting and on comporting themselves with mutual appropriateness.  This
was the occasion on which fair dames who came on pillions sent their
bandboxes before them, supplied with more than their evening costume;
for the feast was not to end with a single evening, like a paltry town
entertainment, where the whole supply of eatables is put on the table
at once, and bedding is scanty.  The Red House was provisioned as if
for a siege; and as for the spare feather-beds ready to be laid on
floors, they were as plentiful as might naturally be expected in a
family that had killed its own geese for many generations.

Godfrey Cass was looking forward to this New Year's Eve with a foolish
reckless longing, that made him half deaf to his importunate companion,
Anxiety.

"Dunsey will be coming home soon: there will be a great blow-up, and
how will you bribe his spite to silence?"  said Anxiety.

"Oh, he won't come home before New Year's Eve, perhaps," said Godfrey;
"and I shall sit by Nancy then, and dance with her, and get a kind look
from her in spite of herself."

"But money is wanted in another quarter," said Anxiety, in a louder
voice, "and how will you get it without selling your mother's diamond
pin?  And if you don't get it...?"

"Well, but something may happen to make things easier.  At any rate,
there's one pleasure for me close at hand: Nancy is coming."

"Yes, and suppose your father should bring matters to a pass that will
oblige you to decline marrying her--and to give your reasons?"

"Hold your tongue, and don't worry me.  I can see Nancy's eyes, just as
they will look at me, and feel her hand in mine already."

But Anxiety went on, though in noisy Christmas company; refusing to be
utterly quieted even by much drinking.



CHAPTER XI

Some women, I grant, would not appear to advantage seated on a pillion,
and attired in a drab joseph and a drab beaver-bonnet, with a crown
resembling a small stew-pan; for a garment suggesting a coachman's
greatcoat, cut out under an exiguity of cloth that would only allow of
miniature capes, is not well adapted to conceal deficiencies of
contour, nor is drab a colour that will throw sallow cheeks into lively
contrast.  It was all the greater triumph to Miss Nancy Lammeter's
beauty that she looked thoroughly bewitching in that costume, as,
seated on the pillion behind her tall, erect father, she held one arm
round him, and looked down, with open-eyed anxiety, at the treacherous
snow-covered pools and puddles, which sent up formidable splashings of
mud under the stamp of Dobbin's foot.  A painter would, perhaps, have
preferred her in those moments when she was free from
self-consciousness; but certainly the bloom on her cheeks was at its
highest point of contrast with the surrounding drab when she arrived at
the door of the Red House, and saw Mr. Godfrey Cass ready to lift her
from the pillion.  She wished her sister Priscilla had come up at the
same time behind the servant, for then she would have contrived that
Mr. Godfrey should have lifted off Priscilla first, and, in the
meantime, she would have persuaded her father to go round to the
horse-block instead of alighting at the door-steps.  It was very
painful, when you had made it quite clear to a young man that you were
determined not to marry him, however much he might wish it, that he
would still continue to pay you marked attentions; besides, why didn't
he always show the same attentions, if he meant them sincerely, instead
of being so strange as Mr. Godfrey Cass was, sometimes behaving as if
he didn't want to speak to her, and taking no notice of her for weeks
and weeks, and then, all on a sudden, almost making love again?
Moreover, it was quite plain he had no real love for her, else he would
not let people have _that_ to say of him which they did say. Did he
suppose that Miss Nancy Lammeter was to be won by any man, squire or no
squire, who led a bad life?  That was not what she had been used to see
in her own father, who was the soberest and best man in that
country-side, only a little hot and hasty now and then, if things were
not done to the minute.

All these thoughts rushed through Miss Nancy's mind, in their habitual
succession, in the moments between her first sight of Mr. Godfrey Cass
standing at the door and her own arrival there. Happily, the Squire
came out too and gave a loud greeting to her father, so that, somehow,
under cover of this noise she seemed to find concealment for her
confusion and neglect of any suitably formal behaviour, while she was
being lifted from the pillion by strong arms which seemed to find her
ridiculously small and light. And there was the best reason for
hastening into the house at once, since the snow was beginning to fall
again, threatening an unpleasant journey for such guests as were still
on the road.  These were a small minority; for already the afternoon
was beginning to decline, and there would not be too much time for the
ladies who came from a distance to attire themselves in readiness for
the early tea which was to inspirit them for the dance.

There was a buzz of voices through the house, as Miss Nancy entered,
mingled with the scrape of a fiddle preluding in the kitchen; but the
Lammeters were guests whose arrival had evidently been thought of so
much that it had been watched for from the windows, for Mrs. Kimble,
who did the honours at the Red House on these great occasions, came
forward to meet Miss Nancy in the hall, and conduct her up-stairs.
Mrs. Kimble was the Squire's sister, as well as the doctor's wife--a
double dignity, with which her diameter was in direct proportion; so
that, a journey up-stairs being rather fatiguing to her, she did not
oppose Miss Nancy's request to be allowed to find her way alone to the
Blue Room, where the Miss Lammeters' bandboxes had been deposited on
their arrival in the morning.

There was hardly a bedroom in the house where feminine compliments were
not passing and feminine toilettes going forward, in various stages, in
space made scanty by extra beds spread upon the floor; and Miss Nancy,
as she entered the Blue Room, had to make her little formal curtsy to a
group of six.  On the one hand, there were ladies no less important
than the two Miss Gunns, the wine merchant's daughters from Lytherly,
dressed in the height of fashion, with the tightest skirts and the
shortest waists, and gazed at by Miss Ladbrook (of the Old Pastures)
with a shyness not unsustained by inward criticism.  Partly, Miss
Ladbrook felt that her own skirt must be regarded as unduly lax by the
Miss Gunns, and partly, that it was a pity the Miss Gunns did not show
that judgment which she herself would show if she were in their place,
by stopping a little on this side of the fashion.  On the other hand,
Mrs. Ladbrook was standing in skull-cap and front, with her turban in
her hand, curtsying and smiling blandly and saying, "After you, ma'am,"
to another lady in similar circumstances, who had politely offered the
precedence at the looking-glass.

But Miss Nancy had no sooner made her curtsy than an elderly lady came
forward, whose full white muslin kerchief, and mob-cap round her curls
of smooth grey hair, were in daring contrast with the puffed yellow
satins and top-knotted caps of her neighbours.  She approached Miss
Nancy with much primness, and said, with a slow, treble suavity--

"Niece, I hope I see you well in health."  Miss Nancy kissed her aunt's
cheek dutifully, and answered, with the same sort of amiable primness,
"Quite well, I thank you, aunt; and I hope I see you the same."

"Thank you, niece; I keep my health for the present.  And how is my
brother-in-law?"

These dutiful questions and answers were continued until it was
ascertained in detail that the Lammeters were all as well as usual, and
the Osgoods likewise, also that niece Priscilla must certainly arrive
shortly, and that travelling on pillions in snowy weather was
unpleasant, though a joseph was a great protection.  Then Nancy was
formally introduced to her aunt's visitors, the Miss Gunns, as being
the daughters of a mother known to _their_ mother, though now for the
first time induced to make a journey into these parts; and these ladies
were so taken by surprise at finding such a lovely face and figure in
an out-of-the-way country place, that they began to feel some curiosity
about the dress she would put on when she took off her joseph.  Miss
Nancy, whose thoughts were always conducted with the propriety and
moderation conspicuous in her manners, remarked to herself that the
Miss Gunns were rather hard-featured than otherwise, and that such very
low dresses as they wore might have been attributed to vanity if their
shoulders had been pretty, but that, being as they were, it was not
reasonable to suppose that they showed their necks from a love of
display, but rather from some obligation not inconsistent with sense
and modesty.  She felt convinced, as she opened her box, that this must
be her aunt Osgood's opinion, for Miss Nancy's mind resembled her
aunt's to a degree that everybody said was surprising, considering the
kinship was on Mr. Osgood's side; and though you might not have
supposed it from the formality of their greeting, there was a devoted
attachment and mutual admiration between aunt and niece.  Even Miss
Nancy's refusal of her cousin Gilbert Osgood (on the ground solely that
he was her cousin), though it had grieved her aunt greatly, had not in
the least cooled the preference which had determined her to leave Nancy
several of her hereditary ornaments, let Gilbert's future wife be whom
she might.

Three of the ladies quickly retired, but the Miss Gunns were quite
content that Mrs. Osgood's inclination to remain with her niece gave
them also a reason for staying to see the rustic beauty's toilette. And
it was really a pleasure--from the first opening of the bandbox, where
everything smelt of lavender and rose-leaves, to the clasping of the
small coral necklace that fitted closely round her little white neck.
Everything belonging to Miss Nancy was of delicate purity and
nattiness: not a crease was where it had no business to be, not a bit
of her linen professed whiteness without fulfilling its profession; the
very pins on her pincushion were stuck in after a pattern from which
she was careful to allow no aberration; and as for her own person, it
gave the same idea of perfect unvarying neatness as the body of a
little bird.  It is true that her light-brown hair was cropped behind
like a boy's, and was dressed in front in a number of flat rings, that
lay quite away from her face; but there was no sort of coiffure that
could make Miss Nancy's cheek and neck look otherwise than pretty; and
when at last she stood complete in her silvery twilled silk, her lace
tucker, her coral necklace, and coral ear-drops, the Miss Gunns could
see nothing to criticise except her hands, which bore the traces of
butter-making, cheese-crushing, and even still coarser work.  But Miss
Nancy was not ashamed of that, for even while she was dressing she
narrated to her aunt how she and Priscilla had packed their boxes
yesterday, because this morning was baking morning, and since they were
leaving home, it was desirable to make a good supply of meat-pies for
the kitchen; and as she concluded this judicious remark, she turned to
the Miss Gunns that she might not commit the rudeness of not including
them in the conversation.  The Miss Gunns smiled stiffly, and thought
what a pity it was that these rich country people, who could afford to
buy such good clothes (really Miss Nancy's lace and silk were very
costly), should be brought up in utter ignorance and vulgarity.  She
actually said "mate" for "meat", "'appen" for "perhaps", and "oss" for
"horse", which, to young ladies living in good Lytherly society, who
habitually said 'orse, even in domestic privacy, and only said 'appen
on the right occasions, was necessarily shocking.  Miss Nancy, indeed,
had never been to any school higher than Dame Tedman's: her
acquaintance with profane literature hardly went beyond the rhymes she
had worked in her large sampler under the lamb and the shepherdess; and
in order to balance an account, she was obliged to effect her
subtraction by removing visible metallic shillings and sixpences from a
visible metallic total.  There is hardly a servant-maid in these days
who is not better informed than Miss Nancy; yet she had the essential
attributes of a lady--high veracity, delicate honour in her dealings,
deference to others, and refined personal habits,--and lest these
should not suffice to convince grammatical fair ones that her feelings
can at all resemble theirs, I will add that she was slightly proud and
exacting, and as constant in her affection towards a baseless opinion
as towards an erring lover.

The anxiety about sister Priscilla, which had grown rather active by
the time the coral necklace was clasped, was happily ended by the
entrance of that cheerful-looking lady herself, with a face made blowsy
by cold and damp.  After the first questions and greetings, she turned
to Nancy, and surveyed her from head to foot--then wheeled her round,
to ascertain that the back view was equally faultless.

"What do you think o' _these_ gowns, aunt Osgood?"  said Priscilla,
while Nancy helped her to unrobe.

"Very handsome indeed, niece," said Mrs. Osgood, with a slight increase
of formality.  She always thought niece Priscilla too rough.

"I'm obliged to have the same as Nancy, you know, for all I'm five
years older, and it makes me look yallow; for she never _will_ have
anything without I have mine just like it, because she wants us to look
like sisters.  And I tell her, folks 'ull think it's my weakness makes
me fancy as I shall look pretty in what she looks pretty in.  For I
_am_ ugly--there's no denying that: I feature my father's family.  But,
law!  I don't mind, do you?"  Priscilla here turned to the Miss Gunns,
rattling on in too much preoccupation with the delight of talking, to
notice that her candour was not appreciated.  "The pretty uns do for
fly-catchers--they keep the men off us.  I've no opinion o' the men,
Miss Gunn--I don't know what _you_ have.  And as for fretting and
stewing about what _they_'ll think of you from morning till night, and
making your life uneasy about what they're doing when they're out o'
your sight--as I tell Nancy, it's a folly no woman need be guilty of,
if she's got a good father and a good home: let her leave it to them as
have got no fortin, and can't help themselves.  As I say, Mr.
Have-your-own-way is the best husband, and the only one I'd ever
promise to obey.  I know it isn't pleasant, when you've been used to
living in a big way, and managing hogsheads and all that, to go and put
your nose in by somebody else's fireside, or to sit down by yourself to
a scrag or a knuckle; but, thank God!  my father's a sober man and
likely to live; and if you've got a man by the chimney-corner, it
doesn't matter if he's childish--the business needn't be broke up."

The delicate process of getting her narrow gown over her head without
injury to her smooth curls, obliged Miss Priscilla to pause in this
rapid survey of life, and Mrs. Osgood seized the opportunity of rising
and saying--

"Well, niece, you'll follow us.  The Miss Gunns will like to go down."

"Sister," said Nancy, when they were alone, "you've offended the Miss
Gunns, I'm sure."

"What have I done, child?"  said Priscilla, in some alarm.

"Why, you asked them if they minded about being ugly--you're so very
blunt."

"Law, did I?  Well, it popped out: it's a mercy I said no more, for I'm
a bad un to live with folks when they don't like the truth.  But as for
being ugly, look at me, child, in this silver-coloured silk--I told you
how it 'ud be--I look as yallow as a daffadil. Anybody 'ud say you
wanted to make a mawkin of me."

"No, Priscy, don't say so.  I begged and prayed of you not to let us
have this silk if you'd like another better.  I was willing to have
_your_ choice, you know I was," said Nancy, in anxious self-vindication.

"Nonsense, child!  you know you'd set your heart on this; and reason
good, for you're the colour o' cream.  It 'ud be fine doings for you to
dress yourself to suit _my_ skin.  What I find fault with, is that
notion o' yours as I must dress myself just like you. But you do as you
like with me--you always did, from when first you begun to walk.  If
you wanted to go the field's length, the field's length you'd go; and
there was no whipping you, for you looked as prim and innicent as a
daisy all the while."

"Priscy," said Nancy, gently, as she fastened a coral necklace, exactly
like her own, round Priscilla's neck, which was very far from being
like her own, "I'm sure I'm willing to give way as far as is right, but
who shouldn't dress alike if it isn't sisters? Would you have us go
about looking as if we were no kin to one another--us that have got no
mother and not another sister in the world?  I'd do what was right, if
I dressed in a gown dyed with cheese-colouring; and I'd rather you'd
choose, and let me wear what pleases you."

"There you go again!  You'd come round to the same thing if one talked
to you from Saturday night till Saturday morning.  It'll be fine fun to
see how you'll master your husband and never raise your voice above the
singing o' the kettle all the while.  I like to see the men mastered!"

"Don't talk _so_, Priscy," said Nancy, blushing.  "You know I don't
mean ever to be married."

"Oh, you never mean a fiddlestick's end!"  said Priscilla, as she
arranged her discarded dress, and closed her bandbox.  "Who shall _I_
have to work for when father's gone, if you are to go and take notions
in your head and be an old maid, because some folks are no better than
they should be?  I haven't a bit o' patience with you--sitting on an
addled egg for ever, as if there was never a fresh un in the world.
One old maid's enough out o' two sisters; and I shall do credit to a
single life, for God A'mighty meant me for it.  Come, we can go down
now.  I'm as ready as a mawkin _can_ be--there's nothing awanting to
frighten the crows, now I've got my ear-droppers in."

As the two Miss Lammeters walked into the large parlour together, any
one who did not know the character of both might certainly have
supposed that the reason why the square-shouldered, clumsy,
high-featured Priscilla wore a dress the facsimile of her pretty
sister's, was either the mistaken vanity of the one, or the malicious
contrivance of the other in order to set off her own rare beauty.  But
the good-natured self-forgetful cheeriness and common-sense of
Priscilla would soon have dissipated the one suspicion; and the modest
calm of Nancy's speech and manners told clearly of a mind free from all
disavowed devices.

Places of honour had been kept for the Miss Lammeters near the head of
the principal tea-table in the wainscoted parlour, now looking fresh
and pleasant with handsome branches of holly, yew, and laurel, from the
abundant growths of the old garden; and Nancy felt an inward flutter,
that no firmness of purpose could prevent, when she saw Mr. Godfrey
Cass advancing to lead her to a seat between himself and Mr.
Crackenthorp, while Priscilla was called to the opposite side between
her father and the Squire.  It certainly did make some difference to
Nancy that the lover she had given up was the young man of quite the
highest consequence in the parish--at home in a venerable and unique
parlour, which was the extremity of grandeur in her experience, a
parlour where _she_ might one day have been mistress, with the
consciousness that she was spoken of as "Madam Cass", the Squire's
wife.  These circumstances exalted her inward drama in her own eyes,
and deepened the emphasis with which she declared to herself that not
the most dazzling rank should induce her to marry a man whose conduct
showed him careless of his character, but that, "love once, love
always", was the motto of a true and pure woman, and no man should ever
have any right over her which would be a call on her to destroy the
dried flowers that she treasured, and always would treasure, for
Godfrey Cass's sake.  And Nancy was capable of keeping her word to
herself under very trying conditions.  Nothing but a becoming blush
betrayed the moving thoughts that urged themselves upon her as she
accepted the seat next to Mr. Crackenthorp; for she was so
instinctively neat and adroit in all her actions, and her pretty lips
met each other with such quiet firmness, that it would have been
difficult for her to appear agitated.

It was not the rector's practice to let a charming blush pass without
an appropriate compliment.  He was not in the least lofty or
aristocratic, but simply a merry-eyed, small-featured, grey-haired man,
with his chin propped by an ample, many-creased white neckcloth which
seemed to predominate over every other point in his person, and somehow
to impress its peculiar character on his remarks; so that to have
considered his amenities apart from his cravat would have been a
severe, and perhaps a dangerous, effort of abstraction.

"Ha, Miss Nancy," he said, turning his head within his cravat and
smiling down pleasantly upon her, "when anybody pretends this has been
a severe winter, I shall tell them I saw the roses blooming on New
Year's Eve--eh, Godfrey, what do _you_ say?"

Godfrey made no reply, and avoided looking at Nancy very markedly; for
though these complimentary personalities were held to be in excellent
taste in old-fashioned Raveloe society, reverent love has a politeness
of its own which it teaches to men otherwise of small schooling.  But
the Squire was rather impatient at Godfrey's showing himself a dull
spark in this way.  By this advanced hour of the day, the Squire was
always in higher spirits than we have seen him in at the
breakfast-table, and felt it quite pleasant to fulfil the hereditary
duty of being noisily jovial and patronizing: the large silver
snuff-box was in active service and was offered without fail to all
neighbours from time to time, however often they might have declined
the favour.  At present, the Squire had only given an express welcome
to the heads of families as they appeared; but always as the evening
deepened, his hospitality rayed out more widely, till he had tapped the
youngest guests on the back and shown a peculiar fondness for their
presence, in the full belief that they must feel their lives made happy
by their belonging to a parish where there was such a hearty man as
Squire Cass to invite them and wish them well.  Even in this early
stage of the jovial mood, it was natural that he should wish to supply
his son's deficiencies by looking and speaking for him.

"Aye, aye," he began, offering his snuff-box to Mr. Lammeter, who for
the second time bowed his head and waved his hand in stiff rejection of
the offer, "us old fellows may wish ourselves young to-night, when we
see the mistletoe-bough in the White Parlour. It's true, most things
are gone back'ard in these last thirty years--the country's going down
since the old king fell ill.  But when I look at Miss Nancy here, I
begin to think the lasses keep up their quality;--ding me if I remember
a sample to match her, not when I was a fine young fellow, and thought
a deal about my pigtail.  No offence to you, madam," he added, bending
to Mrs. Crackenthorp, who sat by him, "I didn't know _you_ when you
were as young as Miss Nancy here."

Mrs. Crackenthorp--a small blinking woman, who fidgeted incessantly
with her lace, ribbons, and gold chain, turning her head about and
making subdued noises, very much like a guinea-pig that twitches its
nose and soliloquizes in all company indiscriminately--now blinked and
fidgeted towards the Squire, and said, "Oh, no--no offence."

This emphatic compliment of the Squire's to Nancy was felt by others
besides Godfrey to have a diplomatic significance; and her father gave
a slight additional erectness to his back, as he looked across the
table at her with complacent gravity.  That grave and orderly senior
was not going to bate a jot of his dignity by seeming elated at the
notion of a match between his family and the Squire's: he was gratified
by any honour paid to his daughter; but he must see an alteration in
several ways before his consent would be vouchsafed. His spare but
healthy person, and high-featured firm face, that looked as if it had
never been flushed by excess, was in strong contrast, not only with the
Squire's, but with the appearance of the Raveloe farmers generally--in
accordance with a favourite saying of his own, that "breed was stronger
than pasture".

"Miss Nancy's wonderful like what her mother was, though; isn't she,
Kimble?"  said the stout lady of that name, looking round for her
husband.

But Doctor Kimble (country apothecaries in old days enjoyed that title
without authority of diploma), being a thin and agile man, was flitting
about the room with his hands in his pockets, making himself agreeable
to his feminine patients, with medical impartiality, and being welcomed
everywhere as a doctor by hereditary right--not one of those miserable
apothecaries who canvass for practice in strange neighbourhoods, and
spend all their income in starving their one horse, but a man of
substance, able to keep an extravagant table like the best of his
patients.  Time out of mind the Raveloe doctor had been a Kimble;
Kimble was inherently a doctor's name; and it was difficult to
contemplate firmly the melancholy fact that the actual Kimble had no
son, so that his practice might one day be handed over to a successor
with the incongruous name of Taylor or Johnson.  But in that case the
wiser people in Raveloe would employ Dr. Blick of Flitton--as less
unnatural.

"Did you speak to me, my dear?"  said the authentic doctor, coming
quickly to his wife's side; but, as if foreseeing that she would be too
much out of breath to repeat her remark, he went on immediately--"Ha,
Miss Priscilla, the sight of you revives the taste of that
super-excellent pork-pie.  I hope the batch isn't near an end."

"Yes, indeed, it is, doctor," said Priscilla; "but I'll answer for it
the next shall be as good.  My pork-pies don't turn out well by chance."

"Not as your doctoring does, eh, Kimble?--because folks forget to take
your physic, eh?"  said the Squire, who regarded physic and doctors as
many loyal churchmen regard the church and the clergy--tasting a joke
against them when he was in health, but impatiently eager for their aid
when anything was the matter with him.  He tapped his box, and looked
round with a triumphant laugh.

"Ah, she has a quick wit, my friend Priscilla has," said the doctor,
choosing to attribute the epigram to a lady rather than allow a
brother-in-law that advantage over him.  "She saves a little pepper to
sprinkle over her talk--that's the reason why she never puts too much
into her pies.  There's my wife now, she never has an answer at her
tongue's end; but if I offend her, she's sure to scarify my throat with
black pepper the next day, or else give me the colic with watery
greens.  That's an awful tit-for-tat."  Here the vivacious doctor made
a pathetic grimace.

"Did you ever hear the like?"  said Mrs. Kimble, laughing above her
double chin with much good-humour, aside to Mrs. Crackenthorp, who
blinked and nodded, and seemed to intend a smile, which, by the
correlation of forces, went off in small twitchings and noises.

"I suppose that's the sort of tit-for-tat adopted in your profession,
Kimble, if you've a grudge against a patient," said the rector.

"Never do have a grudge against our patients," said Mr. Kimble, "except
when they leave us: and then, you see, we haven't the chance of
prescribing for 'em.  Ha, Miss Nancy," he continued, suddenly skipping
to Nancy's side, "you won't forget your promise? You're to save a dance
for me, you know."

"Come, come, Kimble, don't you be too for'ard," said the Squire. "Give
the young uns fair-play.  There's my son Godfrey'll be wanting to have
a round with you if you run off with Miss Nancy. He's bespoke her for
the first dance, I'll be bound.  Eh, sir!  what do you say?"  he
continued, throwing himself backward, and looking at Godfrey.  "Haven't
you asked Miss Nancy to open the dance with you?"

Godfrey, sorely uncomfortable under this significant insistence about
Nancy, and afraid to think where it would end by the time his father
had set his usual hospitable example of drinking before and after
supper, saw no course open but to turn to Nancy and say, with as little
awkwardness as possible--

"No; I've not asked her yet, but I hope she'll consent--if somebody
else hasn't been before me."

"No, I've not engaged myself," said Nancy, quietly, though blushingly.
(If Mr. Godfrey founded any hopes on her consenting to dance with him,
he would soon be undeceived; but there was no need for her to be
uncivil.)

"Then I hope you've no objections to dancing with me," said Godfrey,
beginning to lose the sense that there was anything uncomfortable in
this arrangement.

"No, no objections," said Nancy, in a cold tone.

"Ah, well, you're a lucky fellow, Godfrey," said uncle Kimble; "but
you're my godson, so I won't stand in your way.  Else I'm not so very
old, eh, my dear?"  he went on, skipping to his wife's side again.
"You wouldn't mind my having a second after you were gone--not if I
cried a good deal first?"

"Come, come, take a cup o' tea and stop your tongue, do," said
good-humoured Mrs. Kimble, feeling some pride in a husband who must be
regarded as so clever and amusing by the company generally.  If he had
only not been irritable at cards!

While safe, well-tested personalities were enlivening the tea in this
way, the sound of the fiddle approaching within a distance at which it
could be heard distinctly, made the young people look at each other
with sympathetic impatience for the end of the meal.

"Why, there's Solomon in the hall," said the Squire, "and playing my
fav'rite tune, _I_ believe--"The flaxen-headed ploughboy"--he's for
giving us a hint as we aren't enough in a hurry to hear him play.
Bob," he called out to his third long-legged son, who was at the other
end of the room, "open the door, and tell Solomon to come in.  He shall
give us a tune here."

Bob obeyed, and Solomon walked in, fiddling as he walked, for he would
on no account break off in the middle of a tune.

"Here, Solomon," said the Squire, with loud patronage.  "Round here, my
man.  Ah, I knew it was "The flaxen-headed ploughboy": there's no finer
tune."

Solomon Macey, a small hale old man with an abundant crop of long white
hair reaching nearly to his shoulders, advanced to the indicated spot,
bowing reverently while he fiddled, as much as to say that he respected
the company, though he respected the key-note more.  As soon as he had
repeated the tune and lowered his fiddle, he bowed again to the Squire
and the rector, and said, "I hope I see your honour and your reverence
well, and wishing you health and long life and a happy New Year.  And
wishing the same to you, Mr. Lammeter, sir; and to the other gentlemen,
and the madams, and the young lasses."

As Solomon uttered the last words, he bowed in all directions
solicitously, lest he should be wanting in due respect.  But thereupon
he immediately began to prelude, and fell into the tune which he knew
would be taken as a special compliment by Mr. Lammeter.

"Thank ye, Solomon, thank ye," said Mr. Lammeter when the fiddle paused
again.  "That's "Over the hills and far away", that is.  My father used
to say to me, whenever we heard that tune, "Ah, lad, _I_ come from over
the hills and far away."  There's a many tunes I don't make head or
tail of; but that speaks to me like the blackbird's whistle.  I suppose
it's the name: there's a deal in the name of a tune."

But Solomon was already impatient to prelude again, and presently broke
with much spirit into "Sir Roger de Coverley", at which there was a
sound of chairs pushed back, and laughing voices.

"Aye, aye, Solomon, we know what that means," said the Squire, rising.
"It's time to begin the dance, eh?  Lead the way, then, and we'll all
follow you."

So Solomon, holding his white head on one side, and playing vigorously,
marched forward at the head of the gay procession into the White
Parlour, where the mistletoe-bough was hung, and multitudinous tallow
candles made rather a brilliant effect, gleaming from among the berried
holly-boughs, and reflected in the old-fashioned oval mirrors fastened
in the panels of the white wainscot.  A quaint procession!  Old
Solomon, in his seedy clothes and long white locks, seemed to be luring
that decent company by the magic scream of his fiddle--luring discreet
matrons in turban-shaped caps, nay, Mrs. Crackenthorp herself, the
summit of whose perpendicular feather was on a level with the Squire's
shoulder--luring fair lasses complacently conscious of very short
waists and skirts blameless of front-folds--luring burly fathers in
large variegated waistcoats, and ruddy sons, for the most part shy and
sheepish, in short nether garments and very long coat-tails.

Already Mr. Macey and a few other privileged villagers, who were
allowed to be spectators on these great occasions, were seated on
benches placed for them near the door; and great was the admiration and
satisfaction in that quarter when the couples had formed themselves for
the dance, and the Squire led off with Mrs. Crackenthorp, joining hands
with the rector and Mrs. Osgood. That was as it should be--that was
what everybody had been used to--and the charter of Raveloe seemed to
be renewed by the ceremony. It was not thought of as an unbecoming
levity for the old and middle-aged people to dance a little before
sitting down to cards, but rather as part of their social duties.  For
what were these if not to be merry at appropriate times, interchanging
visits and poultry with due frequency, paying each other
old-established compliments in sound traditional phrases, passing
well-tried personal jokes, urging your guests to eat and drink too much
out of hospitality, and eating and drinking too much in your
neighbour's house to show that you liked your cheer?  And the parson
naturally set an example in these social duties.  For it would not have
been possible for the Raveloe mind, without a peculiar revelation, to
know that a clergyman should be a pale-faced memento of solemnities,
instead of a reasonably faulty man whose exclusive authority to read
prayers and preach, to christen, marry, and bury you, necessarily
coexisted with the right to sell you the ground to be buried in and to
take tithe in kind; on which last point, of course, there was a little
grumbling, but not to the extent of irreligion--not of deeper
significance than the grumbling at the rain, which was by no means
accompanied with a spirit of impious defiance, but with a desire that
the prayer for fine weather might be read forthwith.

There was no reason, then, why the rector's dancing should not be
received as part of the fitness of things quite as much as the
Squire's, or why, on the other hand, Mr. Macey's official respect
should restrain him from subjecting the parson's performance to that
criticism with which minds of extraordinary acuteness must necessarily
contemplate the doings of their fallible fellow-men.

"The Squire's pretty springe, considering his weight," said Mr. Macey,
"and he stamps uncommon well.  But Mr. Lammeter beats 'em all for
shapes: you see he holds his head like a sodger, and he isn't so
cushiony as most o' the oldish gentlefolks--they run fat in general;
and he's got a fine leg.  The parson's nimble enough, but he hasn't got
much of a leg: it's a bit too thick down'ard, and his knees might be a
bit nearer wi'out damage; but he might do worse, he might do worse.
Though he hasn't that grand way o' waving his hand as the Squire has."

"Talk o' nimbleness, look at Mrs. Osgood," said Ben Winthrop, who was
holding his son Aaron between his knees.  "She trips along with her
little steps, so as nobody can see how she goes--it's like as if she
had little wheels to her feet.  She doesn't look a day older nor last
year: she's the finest-made woman as is, let the next be where she
will."

"I don't heed how the women are made," said Mr. Macey, with some
contempt.  "They wear nayther coat nor breeches: you can't make much
out o' their shapes."

"Fayder," said Aaron, whose feet were busy beating out the tune, "how
does that big cock's-feather stick in Mrs. Crackenthorp's yead?  Is
there a little hole for it, like in my shuttle-cock?"

"Hush, lad, hush; that's the way the ladies dress theirselves, that
is," said the father, adding, however, in an undertone to Mr. Macey,
"It does make her look funny, though--partly like a short-necked bottle
wi' a long quill in it.  Hey, by jingo, there's the young Squire
leading off now, wi' Miss Nancy for partners! There's a lass for
you!--like a pink-and-white posy--there's nobody 'ud think as anybody
could be so pritty.  I shouldn't wonder if she's Madam Cass some day,
arter all--and nobody more rightfuller, for they'd make a fine match.
You can find nothing against Master Godfrey's shapes, Macey, _I_'ll bet
a penny."

Mr. Macey screwed up his mouth, leaned his head further on one side,
and twirled his thumbs with a presto movement as his eyes followed
Godfrey up the dance.  At last he summed up his opinion.

"Pretty well down'ard, but a bit too round i' the shoulder-blades. And
as for them coats as he gets from the Flitton tailor, they're a poor
cut to pay double money for."

"Ah, Mr. Macey, you and me are two folks," said Ben, slightly indignant
at this carping.  "When I've got a pot o' good ale, I like to swaller
it, and do my inside good, i'stead o' smelling and staring at it to see
if I can't find faut wi' the brewing.  I should like you to pick me out
a finer-limbed young fellow nor Master Godfrey--one as 'ud knock you
down easier, or 's more pleasanter-looksed when he's piert and merry."

"Tchuh!"  said Mr. Macey, provoked to increased severity, "he isn't
come to his right colour yet: he's partly like a slack-baked pie.  And
I doubt he's got a soft place in his head, else why should he be turned
round the finger by that offal Dunsey as nobody's seen o' late, and let
him kill that fine hunting hoss as was the talk o' the country?  And
one while he was allays after Miss Nancy, and then it all went off
again, like a smell o' hot porridge, as I may say. That wasn't my way
when _I_ went a-coorting."

"Ah, but mayhap Miss Nancy hung off, like, and your lass didn't," said
Ben.

"I should say she didn't," said Mr. Macey, significantly. "Before I
said "sniff", I took care to know as she'd say "snaff", and pretty
quick too.  I wasn't a-going to open _my_ mouth, like a dog at a fly,
and snap it to again, wi' nothing to swaller."

"Well, I think Miss Nancy's a-coming round again," said Ben, "for
Master Godfrey doesn't look so down-hearted to-night.  And I see he's
for taking her away to sit down, now they're at the end o' the dance:
that looks like sweethearting, that does."

The reason why Godfrey and Nancy had left the dance was not so tender
as Ben imagined.  In the close press of couples a slight accident had
happened to Nancy's dress, which, while it was short enough to show her
neat ankle in front, was long enough behind to be caught under the
stately stamp of the Squire's foot, so as to rend certain stitches at
the waist, and cause much sisterly agitation in Priscilla's mind, as
well as serious concern in Nancy's.  One's thoughts may be much
occupied with love-struggles, but hardly so as to be insensible to a
disorder in the general framework of things. Nancy had no sooner
completed her duty in the figure they were dancing than she said to
Godfrey, with a deep blush, that she must go and sit down till
Priscilla could come to her; for the sisters had already exchanged a
short whisper and an open-eyed glance full of meaning.  No reason less
urgent than this could have prevailed on Nancy to give Godfrey this
opportunity of sitting apart with her. As for Godfrey, he was feeling
so happy and oblivious under the long charm of the country-dance with
Nancy, that he got rather bold on the strength of her confusion, and
was capable of leading her straight away, without leave asked, into the
adjoining small parlour, where the card-tables were set.

"Oh no, thank you," said Nancy, coldly, as soon as she perceived where
he was going, "not in there.  I'll wait here till Priscilla's ready to
come to me.  I'm sorry to bring you out of the dance and make myself
troublesome."

"Why, you'll be more comfortable here by yourself," said the artful
Godfrey: "I'll leave you here till your sister can come." He spoke in
an indifferent tone.

That was an agreeable proposition, and just what Nancy desired; why,
then, was she a little hurt that Mr. Godfrey should make it?  They
entered, and she seated herself on a chair against one of the
card-tables, as the stiffest and most unapproachable position she could
choose.

"Thank you, sir," she said immediately.  "I needn't give you any more
trouble.  I'm sorry you've had such an unlucky partner."

"That's very ill-natured of you," said Godfrey, standing by her without
any sign of intended departure, "to be sorry you've danced with me."

"Oh, no, sir, I don't mean to say what's ill-natured at all," said
Nancy, looking distractingly prim and pretty.  "When gentlemen have so
many pleasures, one dance can matter but very little."

"You know that isn't true.  You know one dance with you matters more to
me than all the other pleasures in the world."

It was a long, long while since Godfrey had said anything so direct as
that, and Nancy was startled.  But her instinctive dignity and
repugnance to any show of emotion made her sit perfectly still, and
only throw a little more decision into her voice, as she said--

"No, indeed, Mr. Godfrey, that's not known to me, and I have very good
reasons for thinking different.  But if it's true, I don't wish to hear
it."

