and easy!"--or, "Why, there isn't many lone men 'ud ha' been wishing to
take up with a little un like that: but I reckon the weaving makes you
handier than men as do out-door work--you're partly as handy as a
woman, for weaving comes next to spinning."  Elderly masters and
mistresses, seated observantly in large kitchen arm-chairs, shook their
heads over the difficulties attendant on rearing children, felt Eppie's
round arms and legs, and pronounced them remarkably firm, and told
Silas that, if she turned out well (which, however, there was no
telling), it would be a fine thing for him to have a steady lass to do
for him when he got helpless.  Servant maidens were fond of carrying
her out to look at the hens and chickens, or to see if any cherries
could be shaken down in the orchard; and the small boys and girls
approached her slowly, with cautious movement and steady gaze, like
little dogs face to face with one of their own kind, till attraction
had reached the point at which the soft lips were put out for a kiss.
No child was afraid of approaching Silas when Eppie was near him: there
was no repulsion around him now, either for young or old; for the
little child had come to link him once more with the whole world.
There was love between him and the child that blent them into one, and
there was love between the child and the world--from men and women with
parental looks and tones, to the red lady-birds and the round pebbles.

Silas began now to think of Raveloe life entirely in relation to Eppie:
she must have everything that was a good in Raveloe; and he listened
docilely, that he might come to understand better what this life was,
from which, for fifteen years, he had stood aloof as from a strange
thing, with which he could have no communion: as some man who has a
precious plant to which he would give a nurturing home in a new soil,
thinks of the rain, and the sunshine, and all influences, in relation
to his nursling, and asks industriously for all knowledge that will
help him to satisfy the wants of the searching roots, or to guard leaf
and bud from invading harm.  The disposition to hoard had been utterly
crushed at the very first by the loss of his long-stored gold: the
coins he earned afterwards seemed as irrelevant as stones brought to
complete a house suddenly buried by an earthquake; the sense of
bereavement was too heavy upon him for the old thrill of satisfaction
to arise again at the touch of the newly-earned coin.  And now
something had come to replace his hoard which gave a growing purpose to
the earnings, drawing his hope and joy continually onward beyond the
money.

In old days there were angels who came and took men by the hand and led
them away from the city of destruction.  We see no white-winged angels
now.  But yet men are led away from threatening destruction: a hand is
put into theirs, which leads them forth gently towards a calm and
bright land, so that they look no more backward; and the hand may be a
little child's.



CHAPTER XV

There was one person, as you will believe, who watched with keener
though more hidden interest than any other, the prosperous growth of
Eppie under the weaver's care.  He dared not do anything that would
imply a stronger interest in a poor man's adopted child than could be
expected from the kindliness of the young Squire, when a chance meeting
suggested a little present to a simple old fellow whom others noticed
with goodwill; but he told himself that the time would come when he
might do something towards furthering the welfare of his daughter
without incurring suspicion.  Was he very uneasy in the meantime at his
inability to give his daughter her birthright? I cannot say that he
was.  The child was being taken care of, and would very likely be
happy, as people in humble stations often were--happier, perhaps, than
those brought up in luxury.

That famous ring that pricked its owner when he forgot duty and
followed desire--I wonder if it pricked very hard when he set out on
the chase, or whether it pricked but lightly then, and only pierced to
the quick when the chase had long been ended, and hope, folding her
wings, looked backward and became regret?

Godfrey Cass's cheek and eye were brighter than ever now.  He was so
undivided in his aims, that he seemed like a man of firmness.  No
Dunsey had come back: people had made up their minds that he was gone
for a soldier, or gone "out of the country", and no one cared to be
specific in their inquiries on a subject delicate to a respectable
family.  Godfrey had ceased to see the shadow of Dunsey across his
path; and the path now lay straight forward to the accomplishment of
his best, longest-cherished wishes.  Everybody said Mr. Godfrey had
taken the right turn; and it was pretty clear what would be the end of
things, for there were not many days in the week that he was not seen
riding to the Warrens.  Godfrey himself, when he was asked jocosely if
the day had been fixed, smiled with the pleasant consciousness of a
lover who could say "yes", if he liked.  He felt a reformed man,
delivered from temptation; and the vision of his future life seemed to
him as a promised land for which he had no cause to fight.  He saw
himself with all his happiness centred on his own hearth, while Nancy
would smile on him as he played with the children.

And that other child--not on the hearth--he would not forget it; he
would see that it was well provided for.  That was a father's duty.




PART TWO



CHAPTER XVI

It was a bright autumn Sunday, sixteen years after Silas Marner had
found his new treasure on the hearth.  The bells of the old Raveloe
church were ringing the cheerful peal which told that the morning
service was ended; and out of the arched doorway in the tower came
slowly, retarded by friendly greetings and questions, the richer
parishioners who had chosen this bright Sunday morning as eligible for
church-going.  It was the rural fashion of that time for the more
important members of the congregation to depart first, while their
humbler neighbours waited and looked on, stroking their bent heads or
dropping their curtsies to any large ratepayer who turned to notice
them.

Foremost among these advancing groups of well-clad people, there are
some whom we shall recognize, in spite of Time, who has laid his hand
on them all.  The tall blond man of forty is not much changed in
feature from the Godfrey Cass of six-and-twenty: he is only fuller in
flesh, and has only lost the indefinable look of youth--a loss which is
marked even when the eye is undulled and the wrinkles are not yet come.
Perhaps the pretty woman, not much younger than he, who is leaning on
his arm, is more changed than her husband: the lovely bloom that used
to be always on her cheek now comes but fitfully, with the fresh
morning air or with some strong surprise; yet to all who love human
faces best for what they tell of human experience, Nancy's beauty has a
heightened interest.  Often the soul is ripened into fuller goodness
while age has spread an ugly film, so that mere glances can never
divine the preciousness of the fruit.  But the years have not been so
cruel to Nancy.  The firm yet placid mouth, the clear veracious glance
of the brown eyes, speak now of a nature that has been tested and has
kept its highest qualities; and even the costume, with its dainty
neatness and purity, has more significance now the coquetries of youth
can have nothing to do with it.

Mr. and Mrs. Godfrey Cass (any higher title has died away from Raveloe
lips since the old Squire was gathered to his fathers and his
inheritance was divided) have turned round to look for the tall aged
man and the plainly dressed woman who are a little behind--Nancy having
observed that they must wait for "father and Priscilla"--and now they
all turn into a narrower path leading across the churchyard to a small
gate opposite the Red House.  We will not follow them now; for may
there not be some others in this departing congregation whom we should
like to see again--some of those who are not likely to be handsomely
clad, and whom we may not recognize so easily as the master and
mistress of the Red House?

But it is impossible to mistake Silas Marner.  His large brown eyes
seem to have gathered a longer vision, as is the way with eyes that
have been short-sighted in early life, and they have a less vague, a
more answering gaze; but in everything else one sees signs of a frame
much enfeebled by the lapse of the sixteen years.  The weaver's bent
shoulders and white hair give him almost the look of advanced age,
though he is not more than five-and-fifty; but there is the freshest
blossom of youth close by his side--a blonde dimpled girl of eighteen,
who has vainly tried to chastise her curly auburn hair into smoothness
under her brown bonnet: the hair ripples as obstinately as a brooklet
under the March breeze, and the little ringlets burst away from the
restraining comb behind and show themselves below the bonnet-crown.
Eppie cannot help being rather vexed about her hair, for there is no
other girl in Raveloe who has hair at all like it, and she thinks hair
ought to be smooth.  She does not like to be blameworthy even in small
things: you see how neatly her prayer-book is folded in her spotted
handkerchief.

That good-looking young fellow, in a new fustian suit, who walks behind
her, is not quite sure upon the question of hair in the abstract, when
Eppie puts it to him, and thinks that perhaps straight hair is the best
in general, but he doesn't want Eppie's hair to be different.  She
surely divines that there is some one behind her who is thinking about
her very particularly, and mustering courage to come to her side as
soon as they are out in the lane, else why should she look rather shy,
and take care not to turn away her head from her father Silas, to whom
she keeps murmuring little sentences as to who was at church and who
was not at church, and how pretty the red mountain-ash is over the
Rectory wall?

"I wish _we_ had a little garden, father, with double daisies in, like
Mrs. Winthrop's," said Eppie, when they were out in the lane; "only
they say it 'ud take a deal of digging and bringing fresh soil--and you
couldn't do that, could you, father?  Anyhow, I shouldn't like you to
do it, for it 'ud be too hard work for you."

"Yes, I could do it, child, if you want a bit o' garden: these long
evenings, I could work at taking in a little bit o' the waste, just
enough for a root or two o' flowers for you; and again, i' the morning,
I could have a turn wi' the spade before I sat down to the loom.  Why
didn't you tell me before as you wanted a bit o' garden?"

"_I_ can dig it for you, Master Marner," said the young man in fustian,
who was now by Eppie's side, entering into the conversation without the
trouble of formalities.  "It'll be play to me after I've done my day's
work, or any odd bits o' time when the work's slack.  And I'll bring
you some soil from Mr. Cass's garden--he'll let me, and willing."

"Eh, Aaron, my lad, are you there?"  said Silas; "I wasn't aware of
you; for when Eppie's talking o' things, I see nothing but what she's
a-saying.  Well, if you could help me with the digging, we might get
her a bit o' garden all the sooner."

"Then, if you think well and good," said Aaron, "I'll come to the
Stone-pits this afternoon, and we'll settle what land's to be taken in,
and I'll get up an hour earlier i' the morning, and begin on it."

"But not if you don't promise me not to work at the hard digging,
father," said Eppie.  "For I shouldn't ha' said anything about it," she
added, half-bashfully, half-roguishly, "only Mrs. Winthrop said as
Aaron 'ud be so good, and--"

"And you might ha' known it without mother telling you," said Aaron.
"And Master Marner knows too, I hope, as I'm able and willing to do a
turn o' work for him, and he won't do me the unkindness to anyways take
it out o' my hands."

"There, now, father, you won't work in it till it's all easy," said
Eppie, "and you and me can mark out the beds, and make holes and plant
the roots.  It'll be a deal livelier at the Stone-pits when we've got
some flowers, for I always think the flowers can see us and know what
we're talking about.  And I'll have a bit o' rosemary, and bergamot,
and thyme, because they're so sweet-smelling; but there's no lavender
only in the gentlefolks' gardens, I think."

"That's no reason why you shouldn't have some," said Aaron, "for I can
bring you slips of anything; I'm forced to cut no end of 'em when I'm
gardening, and throw 'em away mostly.  There's a big bed o' lavender at
the Red House: the missis is very fond of it."

"Well," said Silas, gravely, "so as you don't make free for us, or ask
for anything as is worth much at the Red House: for Mr. Cass's been so
good to us, and built us up the new end o' the cottage, and given us
beds and things, as I couldn't abide to be imposin' for garden-stuff or
anything else."

"No, no, there's no imposin'," said Aaron; "there's never a garden in
all the parish but what there's endless waste in it for want o'
somebody as could use everything up.  It's what I think to myself
sometimes, as there need nobody run short o' victuals if the land was
made the most on, and there was never a morsel but what could find its
way to a mouth.  It sets one thinking o' that--gardening does.  But I
must go back now, else mother 'ull be in trouble as I aren't there."

"Bring her with you this afternoon, Aaron," said Eppie; "I shouldn't
like to fix about the garden, and her not know everything from the
first--should _you_, father?"

"Aye, bring her if you can, Aaron," said Silas; "she's sure to have a
word to say as'll help us to set things on their right end."

Aaron turned back up the village, while Silas and Eppie went on up the
lonely sheltered lane.

"O daddy!"  she began, when they were in privacy, clasping and
squeezing Silas's arm, and skipping round to give him an energetic
kiss.  "My little old daddy!  I'm so glad.  I don't think I shall want
anything else when we've got a little garden; and I knew Aaron would
dig it for us," she went on with roguish triumph--"I knew that very
well."

"You're a deep little puss, you are," said Silas, with the mild passive
happiness of love-crowned age in his face; "but you'll make yourself
fine and beholden to Aaron."

"Oh, no, I shan't," said Eppie, laughing and frisking; "he likes it."

"Come, come, let me carry your prayer-book, else you'll be dropping it,
jumping i' that way."

Eppie was now aware that her behaviour was under observation, but it
was only the observation of a friendly donkey, browsing with a log
fastened to his foot--a meek donkey, not scornfully critical of human
trivialities, but thankful to share in them, if possible, by getting
his nose scratched; and Eppie did not fail to gratify him with her
usual notice, though it was attended with the inconvenience of his
following them, painfully, up to the very door of their home.

But the sound of a sharp bark inside, as Eppie put the key in the door,
modified the donkey's views, and he limped away again without bidding.
The sharp bark was the sign of an excited welcome that was awaiting
them from a knowing brown terrier, who, after dancing at their legs in
a hysterical manner, rushed with a worrying noise at a tortoise-shell
kitten under the loom, and then rushed back with a sharp bark again, as
much as to say, "I have done my duty by this feeble creature, you
perceive"; while the lady-mother of the kitten sat sunning her white
bosom in the window, and looked round with a sleepy air of expecting
caresses, though she was not going to take any trouble for them.

The presence of this happy animal life was not the only change which
had come over the interior of the stone cottage.  There was no bed now
in the living-room, and the small space was well filled with decent
furniture, all bright and clean enough to satisfy Dolly Winthrop's eye.
The oaken table and three-cornered oaken chair were hardly what was
likely to be seen in so poor a cottage: they had come, with the beds
and other things, from the Red House; for Mr. Godfrey Cass, as every
one said in the village, did very kindly by the weaver; and it was
nothing but right a man should be looked on and helped by those who
could afford it, when he had brought up an orphan child, and been
father and mother to her--and had lost his money too, so as he had
nothing but what he worked for week by week, and when the weaving was
going down too--for there was less and less flax spun--and Master
Marner was none so young.  Nobody was jealous of the weaver, for he was
regarded as an exceptional person, whose claims on neighbourly help
were not to be matched in Raveloe.  Any superstition that remained
concerning him had taken an entirely new colour; and Mr. Macey, now a
very feeble old man of fourscore and six, never seen except in his
chimney-corner or sitting in the sunshine at his door-sill, was of
opinion that when a man had done what Silas had done by an orphan
child, it was a sign that his money would come to light again, or
leastwise that the robber would be made to answer for it--for, as Mr.
Macey observed of himself, his faculties were as strong as ever.

Silas sat down now and watched Eppie with a satisfied gaze as she
spread the clean cloth, and set on it the potato-pie, warmed up slowly
in a safe Sunday fashion, by being put into a dry pot over a
slowly-dying fire, as the best substitute for an oven.  For Silas would
not consent to have a grate and oven added to his conveniences: he
loved the old brick hearth as he had loved his brown pot--and was it
not there when he had found Eppie?  The gods of the hearth exist for us
still; and let all new faith be tolerant of that fetishism, lest it
bruise its own roots.

Silas ate his dinner more silently than usual, soon laying down his
knife and fork, and watching half-abstractedly Eppie's play with Snap
and the cat, by which her own dining was made rather a lengthy
business.  Yet it was a sight that might well arrest wandering
thoughts: Eppie, with the rippling radiance of her hair and the
whiteness of her rounded chin and throat set off by the dark-blue
cotton gown, laughing merrily as the kitten held on with her four claws
to one shoulder, like a design for a jug-handle, while Snap on the
right hand and Puss on the other put up their paws towards a morsel
which she held out of the reach of both--Snap occasionally desisting in
order to remonstrate with the cat by a cogent worrying growl on the
greediness and futility of her conduct; till Eppie relented, caressed
them both, and divided the morsel between them.

But at last Eppie, glancing at the clock, checked the play, and said,
"O daddy, you're wanting to go into the sunshine to smoke your pipe.
But I must clear away first, so as the house may be tidy when godmother
comes.  I'll make haste--I won't be long."

Silas had taken to smoking a pipe daily during the last two years,
having been strongly urged to it by the sages of Raveloe, as a practice
"good for the fits"; and this advice was sanctioned by Dr. Kimble, on
the ground that it was as well to try what could do no harm--a
principle which was made to answer for a great deal of work in that
gentleman's medical practice.  Silas did not highly enjoy smoking, and
often wondered how his neighbours could be so fond of it; but a humble
sort of acquiescence in what was held to be good, had become a strong
habit of that new self which had been developed in him since he had
found Eppie on his hearth: it had been the only clew his bewildered
mind could hold by in cherishing this young life that had been sent to
him out of the darkness into which his gold had departed.  By seeking
what was needful for Eppie, by sharing the effect that everything
produced on her, he had himself come to appropriate the forms of custom
and belief which were the mould of Raveloe life; and as, with
reawakening sensibilities, memory also reawakened, he had begun to
ponder over the elements of his old faith, and blend them with his new
impressions, till he recovered a consciousness of unity between his
past and present. The sense of presiding goodness and the human trust
which come with all pure peace and joy, had given him a dim impression
that there had been some error, some mistake, which had thrown that
dark shadow over the days of his best years; and as it grew more and
more easy to him to open his mind to Dolly Winthrop, he gradually
communicated to her all he could describe of his early life.  The
communication was necessarily a slow and difficult process, for Silas's
meagre power of explanation was not aided by any readiness of
interpretation in Dolly, whose narrow outward experience gave her no
key to strange customs, and made every novelty a source of wonder that
arrested them at every step of the narrative.  It was only by
fragments, and at intervals which left Dolly time to revolve what she
had heard till it acquired some familiarity for her, that Silas at last
arrived at the climax of the sad story--the drawing of lots, and its
false testimony concerning him; and this had to be repeated in several
interviews, under new questions on her part as to the nature of this
plan for detecting the guilty and clearing the innocent.

"And yourn's the same Bible, you're sure o' that, Master Marner--the
Bible as you brought wi' you from that country--it's the same as what
they've got at church, and what Eppie's a-learning to read in?"

"Yes," said Silas, "every bit the same; and there's drawing o' lots in
the Bible, mind you," he added in a lower tone.

"Oh, dear, dear," said Dolly in a grieved voice, as if she were hearing
an unfavourable report of a sick man's case.  She was silent for some
minutes; at last she said--

"There's wise folks, happen, as know how it all is; the parson knows,
I'll be bound; but it takes big words to tell them things, and such as
poor folks can't make much out on.  I can never rightly know the
meaning o' what I hear at church, only a bit here and there, but I know
it's good words--I do.  But what lies upo' your mind--it's this, Master
Marner: as, if Them above had done the right thing by you, They'd never
ha' let you be turned out for a wicked thief when you was innicent."

"Ah!"  said Silas, who had now come to understand Dolly's phraseology,
"that was what fell on me like as if it had been red-hot iron; because,
you see, there was nobody as cared for me or clave to me above nor
below.  And him as I'd gone out and in wi' for ten year and more, since
when we was lads and went halves--mine own familiar friend in whom I
trusted, had lifted up his heel again' me, and worked to ruin me."

"Eh, but he was a bad un--I can't think as there's another such," said
Dolly.  "But I'm o'ercome, Master Marner; I'm like as if I'd waked and
didn't know whether it was night or morning. I feel somehow as sure as
I do when I've laid something up though I can't justly put my hand on
it, as there was a rights in what happened to you, if one could but
make it out; and you'd no call to lose heart as you did.  But we'll
talk on it again; for sometimes things come into my head when I'm
leeching or poulticing, or such, as I could never think on when I was
sitting still."

Dolly was too useful a woman not to have many opportunities of
illumination of the kind she alluded to, and she was not long before
she recurred to the subject.

"Master Marner," she said, one day that she came to bring home Eppie's
washing, "I've been sore puzzled for a good bit wi' that trouble o'
yourn and the drawing o' lots; and it got twisted back'ards and
for'ards, as I didn't know which end to lay hold on. But it come to me
all clear like, that night when I was sitting up wi' poor Bessy Fawkes,
as is dead and left her children behind, God help 'em--it come to me as
clear as daylight; but whether I've got hold on it now, or can anyways
bring it to my tongue's end, that I don't know.  For I've often a deal
inside me as'll never come out; and for what you talk o' your folks in
your old country niver saying prayers by heart nor saying 'em out of a
book, they must be wonderful cliver; for if I didn't know "Our Father",
and little bits o' good words as I can carry out o' church wi' me, I
might down o' my knees every night, but nothing could I say."

"But you can mostly say something as I can make sense on, Mrs.
Winthrop," said Silas.

"Well, then, Master Marner, it come to me summat like this: I can make
nothing o' the drawing o' lots and the answer coming wrong; it 'ud
mayhap take the parson to tell that, and he could only tell us i' big
words.  But what come to me as clear as the daylight, it was when I was
troubling over poor Bessy Fawkes, and it allays comes into my head when
I'm sorry for folks, and feel as I can't do a power to help 'em, not if
I was to get up i' the middle o' the night--it comes into my head as
Them above has got a deal tenderer heart nor what I've got--for I can't
be anyways better nor Them as made me; and if anything looks hard to
me, it's because there's things I don't know on; and for the matter o'
that, there may be plenty o' things I don't know on, for it's little as
I know--that it is. And so, while I was thinking o' that, you come into
my mind, Master Marner, and it all come pouring in:--if _I_ felt i' my
inside what was the right and just thing by you, and them as prayed and
drawed the lots, all but that wicked un, if _they_'d ha' done the right
thing by you if they could, isn't there Them as was at the making on
us, and knows better and has a better will?  And that's all as ever I
can be sure on, and everything else is a big puzzle to me when I think
on it.  For there was the fever come and took off them as were
full-growed, and left the helpless children; and there's the breaking
o' limbs; and them as 'ud do right and be sober have to suffer by them
as are contrairy--eh, there's trouble i' this world, and there's things
as we can niver make out the rights on. And all as we've got to do is
to trusten, Master Marner--to do the right thing as fur as we know, and
to trusten.  For if us as knows so little can see a bit o' good and
rights, we may be sure as there's a good and a rights bigger nor what
we can know--I feel it i' my own inside as it must be so.  And if you
could but ha' gone on trustening, Master Marner, you wouldn't ha' run
away from your fellow-creaturs and been so lone."

"Ah, but that 'ud ha' been hard," said Silas, in an under-tone; "it 'ud
ha' been hard to trusten then."

"And so it would," said Dolly, almost with compunction; "them things
are easier said nor done; and I'm partly ashamed o' talking."

"Nay, nay," said Silas, "you're i' the right, Mrs. Winthrop--you're i'
the right.  There's good i' this world--I've a feeling o' that now; and
it makes a man feel as there's a good more nor he can see, i' spite o'
the trouble and the wickedness.  That drawing o' the lots is dark; but
the child was sent to me: there's dealings with us--there's dealings."

This dialogue took place in Eppie's earlier years, when Silas had to
part with her for two hours every day, that she might learn to read at
the dame school, after he had vainly tried himself to guide her in that
first step to learning.  Now that she was grown up, Silas had often
been led, in those moments of quiet outpouring which come to people who
live together in perfect love, to talk with _her_ too of the past, and
how and why he had lived a lonely man until she had been sent to him.
For it would have been impossible for him to hide from Eppie that she
was not his own child: even if the most delicate reticence on the point
could have been expected from Raveloe gossips in her presence, her own
questions about her mother could not have been parried, as she grew up,
without that complete shrouding of the past which would have made a
painful barrier between their minds. So Eppie had long known how her
mother had died on the snowy ground, and how she herself had been found
on the hearth by father Silas, who had taken her golden curls for his
lost guineas brought back to him.  The tender and peculiar love with
which Silas had reared her in almost inseparable companionship with
himself, aided by the seclusion of their dwelling, had preserved her
from the lowering influences of the village talk and habits, and had
kept her mind in that freshness which is sometimes falsely supposed to
be an invariable attribute of rusticity.  Perfect love has a breath of
poetry which can exalt the relations of the least-instructed human
beings; and this breath of poetry had surrounded Eppie from the time
when she had followed the bright gleam that beckoned her to Silas's
hearth; so that it is not surprising if, in other things besides her
delicate prettiness, she was not quite a common village maiden, but had
a touch of refinement and fervour which came from no other teaching
than that of tenderly-nurtured unvitiated feeling.  She was too
childish and simple for her imagination to rove into questions about
her unknown father; for a long while it did not even occur to her that
she must have had a father; and the first time that the idea of her
mother having had a husband presented itself to her, was when Silas
showed her the wedding-ring which had been taken from the wasted
finger, and had been carefully preserved by him in a little lackered
box shaped like a shoe.  He delivered this box into Eppie's charge when
she had grown up, and she often opened it to look at the ring: but
still she thought hardly at all about the father of whom it was the
symbol.  Had she not a father very close to her, who loved her better
than any real fathers in the village seemed to love their daughters?
On the contrary, who her mother was, and how she came to die in that
forlornness, were questions that often pressed on Eppie's mind.  Her
knowledge of Mrs. Winthrop, who was her nearest friend next to Silas,
made her feel that a mother must be very precious; and she had again
and again asked Silas to tell her how her mother looked, whom she was
like, and how he had found her against the furze bush, led towards it
by the little footsteps and the outstretched arms.  The furze bush was
there still; and this afternoon, when Eppie came out with Silas into
the sunshine, it was the first object that arrested her eyes and
thoughts.

"Father," she said, in a tone of gentle gravity, which sometimes came
like a sadder, slower cadence across her playfulness, "we shall take
the furze bush into the garden; it'll come into the corner, and just
against it I'll put snowdrops and crocuses, 'cause Aaron says they
won't die out, but'll always get more and more."

"Ah, child," said Silas, always ready to talk when he had his pipe in
his hand, apparently enjoying the pauses more than the puffs, "it
wouldn't do to leave out the furze bush; and there's nothing prettier,
to my thinking, when it's yallow with flowers.  But it's just come into
my head what we're to do for a fence--mayhap Aaron can help us to a
thought; but a fence we must have, else the donkeys and things 'ull
come and trample everything down.  And fencing's hard to be got at, by
what I can make out."

"Oh, I'll tell you, daddy," said Eppie, clasping her hands suddenly,
after a minute's thought.  "There's lots o' loose stones about, some of
'em not big, and we might lay 'em atop of one another, and make a wall.
You and me could carry the smallest, and Aaron 'ud carry the rest--I
know he would."

"Eh, my precious un," said Silas, "there isn't enough stones to go all
round; and as for you carrying, why, wi' your little arms you couldn't
carry a stone no bigger than a turnip.  You're dillicate made, my
dear," he added, with a tender intonation--"that's what Mrs. Winthrop
says."

"Oh, I'm stronger than you think, daddy," said Eppie; "and if there
wasn't stones enough to go all round, why they'll go part o' the way,
and then it'll be easier to get sticks and things for the rest.  See
here, round the big pit, what a many stones!"

She skipped forward to the pit, meaning to lift one of the stones and
exhibit her strength, but she started back in surprise.

"Oh, father, just come and look here," she exclaimed--"come and see how
the water's gone down since yesterday.  Why, yesterday the pit was ever
so full!"

"Well, to be sure," said Silas, coming to her side.  "Why, that's the
draining they've begun on, since harvest, i' Mr. Osgood's fields, I
reckon.  The foreman said to me the other day, when I passed by 'em,
"Master Marner," he said, "I shouldn't wonder if we lay your bit o'
waste as dry as a bone."  It was Mr. Godfrey Cass, he said, had gone
into the draining: he'd been taking these fields o' Mr. Osgood."

"How odd it'll seem to have the old pit dried up!"  said Eppie, turning
away, and stooping to lift rather a large stone.  "See, daddy, I can
carry this quite well," she said, going along with much energy for a
few steps, but presently letting it fall.

"Ah, you're fine and strong, aren't you?"  said Silas, while Eppie
shook her aching arms and laughed.  "Come, come, let us go and sit down
on the bank against the stile there, and have no more lifting. You
might hurt yourself, child.  You'd need have somebody to work for
you--and my arm isn't over strong."

Silas uttered the last sentence slowly, as if it implied more than met
the ear; and Eppie, when they sat down on the bank, nestled close to
his side, and, taking hold caressingly of the arm that was not over
strong, held it on her lap, while Silas puffed again dutifully at the
pipe, which occupied his other arm.  An ash in the hedgerow behind made
a fretted screen from the sun, and threw happy playful shadows all
about them.

"Father," said Eppie, very gently, after they had been sitting in
silence a little while, "if I was to be married, ought I to be married
with my mother's ring?"

Silas gave an almost imperceptible start, though the question fell in
with the under-current of thought in his own mind, and then said, in a
subdued tone, "Why, Eppie, have you been a-thinking on it?"

"Only this last week, father," said Eppie, ingenuously, "since Aaron
talked to me about it."

"And what did he say?"  said Silas, still in the same subdued way, as
if he were anxious lest he should fall into the slightest tone that was
not for Eppie's good.

"He said he should like to be married, because he was a-going in
four-and-twenty, and had got a deal of gardening work, now Mr. Mott's
given up; and he goes twice a-week regular to Mr. Cass's, and once to
Mr. Osgood's, and they're going to take him on at the Rectory."

"And who is it as he's wanting to marry?"  said Silas, with rather a
sad smile.

"Why, me, to be sure, daddy," said Eppie, with dimpling laughter,
kissing her father's cheek; "as if he'd want to marry anybody else!"

"And you mean to have him, do you?"  said Silas.

"Yes, some time," said Eppie, "I don't know when.  Everybody's married
some time, Aaron says.  But I told him that wasn't true: for, I said,
look at father--he's never been married."

"No, child," said Silas, "your father was a lone man till you was sent
to him."

"But you'll never be lone again, father," said Eppie, tenderly. "That
was what Aaron said--"I could never think o' taking you away from
Master Marner, Eppie."  And I said, "It 'ud be no use if you did,
Aaron."  And he wants us all to live together, so as you needn't work a
bit, father, only what's for your own pleasure; and he'd be as good as
a son to you--that was what he said."

"And should you like that, Eppie?"  said Silas, looking at her.

"I shouldn't mind it, father," said Eppie, quite simply.  "And I should
like things to be so as you needn't work much.  But if it wasn't for
that, I'd sooner things didn't change.  I'm very happy: I like Aaron to
be fond of me, and come and see us often, and behave pretty to you--he
always _does_ behave pretty to you, doesn't he, father?"

"Yes, child, nobody could behave better," said Silas, emphatically.
"He's his mother's lad."

"But I don't want any change," said Eppie.  "I should like to go on a
long, long while, just as we are.  Only Aaron does want a change; and
he made me cry a bit--only a bit--because he said I didn't care for
him, for if I cared for him I should want us to be married, as he did."

"Eh, my blessed child," said Silas, laying down his pipe as if it were
useless to pretend to smoke any longer, "you're o'er young to be
married.  We'll ask Mrs. Winthrop--we'll ask Aaron's mother what _she_
thinks: if there's a right thing to do, she'll come at it.  But there's
this to be thought on, Eppie: things _will_ change, whether we like it
or no; things won't go on for a long while just as they are and no
difference.  I shall get older and helplesser, and be a burden on you,
belike, if I don't go away from you altogether.  Not as I mean you'd
think me a burden--I know you wouldn't--but it 'ud be hard upon you;
and when I look for'ard to that, I like to think as you'd have somebody
else besides me--somebody young and strong, as'll outlast your own
life, and take care on you to the end."  Silas paused, and, resting his
wrists on his knees, lifted his hands up and down meditatively as he
looked on the ground.

"Then, would you like me to be married, father?"  said Eppie, with a
little trembling in her voice.

"I'll not be the man to say no, Eppie," said Silas, emphatically; "but
we'll ask your godmother.  She'll wish the right thing by you and her
son too."

"There they come, then," said Eppie.  "Let us go and meet 'em. Oh, the
pipe!  won't you have it lit again, father?"  said Eppie, lifting that
medicinal appliance from the ground.

"Nay, child," said Silas, "I've done enough for to-day.  I think,
mayhap, a little of it does me more good than so much at once."



CHAPTER XVII

While Silas and Eppie were seated on the bank discoursing in the
fleckered shade of the ash tree, Miss Priscilla Lammeter was resisting
her sister's arguments, that it would be better to take tea at the Red
House, and let her father have a long nap, than drive home to the
Warrens so soon after dinner.  The family party (of four only) were
seated round the table in the dark wainscoted parlour, with the Sunday
dessert before them, of fresh filberts, apples, and pears, duly
ornamented with leaves by Nancy's own hand before the bells had rung
for church.

A great change has come over the dark wainscoted parlour since we saw
it in Godfrey's bachelor days, and under the wifeless reign of the old
Squire.  Now all is polish, on which no yesterday's dust is ever
allowed to rest, from the yard's width of oaken boards round the
carpet, to the old Squire's gun and whips and walking-sticks, ranged on
the stag's antlers above the mantelpiece.  All other signs of sporting
and outdoor occupation Nancy has removed to another room; but she has
brought into the Red House the habit of filial reverence, and preserves
sacredly in a place of honour these relics of her husband's departed
father.  The tankards are on the side-table still, but the bossed
silver is undimmed by handling, and there are no dregs to send forth
unpleasant suggestions: the only prevailing scent is of the lavender
and rose-leaves that fill the vases of Derbyshire spar.  All is purity
and order in this once dreary room, for, fifteen years ago, it was
entered by a new presiding spirit.

"Now, father," said Nancy, "_is_ there any call for you to go home to
tea?  Mayn't you just as well stay with us?--such a beautiful evening
as it's likely to be."

The old gentleman had been talking with Godfrey about the increasing
poor-rate and the ruinous times, and had not heard the dialogue between
his daughters.

"My dear, you must ask Priscilla," he said, in the once firm voice, now
become rather broken.  "She manages me and the farm too."

"And reason good as I should manage you, father," said Priscilla, "else
you'd be giving yourself your death with rheumatism.  And as for the
farm, if anything turns out wrong, as it can't but do in these times,
there's nothing kills a man so soon as having nobody to find fault with
but himself.  It's a deal the best way o' being master, to let somebody
else do the ordering, and keep the blaming in your own hands.  It 'ud
save many a man a stroke, _I_ believe."

"Well, well, my dear," said her father, with a quiet laugh, "I didn't
say you don't manage for everybody's good."

"Then manage so as you may stay tea, Priscilla," said Nancy, putting
her hand on her sister's arm affectionately.  "Come now; and we'll go
round the garden while father has his nap."

"My dear child, he'll have a beautiful nap in the gig, for I shall
drive.  And as for staying tea, I can't hear of it; for there's this
dairymaid, now she knows she's to be married, turned Michaelmas, she'd
as lief pour the new milk into the pig-trough as into the pans.  That's
the way with 'em all: it's as if they thought the world 'ud be new-made
because they're to be married.  So come and let me put my bonnet on,
and there'll be time for us to walk round the garden while the horse is
being put in."

When the sisters were treading the neatly-swept garden-walks, between
the bright turf that contrasted pleasantly with the dark cones and
arches and wall-like hedges of yew, Priscilla said--

"I'm as glad as anything at your husband's making that exchange o' land
with cousin Osgood, and beginning the dairying.  It's a thousand pities
you didn't do it before; for it'll give you something to fill your
mind.  There's nothing like a dairy if folks want a bit o' worrit to
make the days pass.  For as for rubbing furniture, when you can once
see your face in a table there's nothing else to look for; but there's
always something fresh with the dairy; for even in the depths o' winter
there's some pleasure in conquering the butter, and making it come
whether or no.  My dear," added Priscilla, pressing her sister's hand
affectionately as they walked side by side, "you'll never be low when
you've got a dairy."

"Ah, Priscilla," said Nancy, returning the pressure with a grateful
glance of her clear eyes, "but it won't make up to Godfrey: a dairy's
not so much to a man.  And it's only what he cares for that ever makes
me low.  I'm contented with the blessings we have, if he could be
contented."

"It drives me past patience," said Priscilla, impetuously, "that way o'
the men--always wanting and wanting, and never easy with what they've
got: they can't sit comfortable in their chairs when they've neither
ache nor pain, but either they must stick a pipe in their mouths, to
make 'em better than well, or else they must be swallowing something
strong, though they're forced to make haste before the next meal comes
in.  But joyful be it spoken, our father was never that sort o' man.
And if it had pleased God to make you ugly, like me, so as the men
wouldn't ha' run after you, we might have kept to our own family, and
had nothing to do with folks as have got uneasy blood in their veins."

"Oh, don't say so, Priscilla," said Nancy, repenting that she had
called forth this outburst; "nobody has any occasion to find fault with
Godfrey.  It's natural he should be disappointed at not having any
children: every man likes to have somebody to work for and lay by for,
and he always counted so on making a fuss with 'em when they were
little.  There's many another man 'ud hanker more than he does. He's
the best of husbands."

"Oh, I know," said Priscilla, smiling sarcastically, "I know the way o'
wives; they set one on to abuse their husbands, and then they turn
round on one and praise 'em as if they wanted to sell 'em.  But
father'll be waiting for me; we must turn now."

The large gig with the steady old grey was at the front door, and Mr.
Lammeter was already on the stone steps, passing the time in recalling
to Godfrey what very fine points Speckle had when his master used to
ride him.

"I always _would_ have a good horse, you know," said the old gentleman,
not liking that spirited time to be quite effaced from the memory of
his juniors.

"Mind you bring Nancy to the Warrens before the week's out, Mr. Cass,"
was Priscilla's parting injunction, as she took the reins, and shook
them gently, by way of friendly incitement to Speckle.

"I shall just take a turn to the fields against the Stone-pits, Nancy,
and look at the draining," said Godfrey.

"You'll be in again by tea-time, dear?"

"Oh, yes, I shall be back in an hour."

It was Godfrey's custom on a Sunday afternoon to do a little
contemplative farming in a leisurely walk.  Nancy seldom accompanied
him; for the women of her generation--unless, like Priscilla, they took
to outdoor management--were not given to much walking beyond their own
house and garden, finding sufficient exercise in domestic duties.  So,
when Priscilla was not with her, she usually sat with Mant's Bible
before her, and after following the text with her eyes for a little
while, she would gradually permit them to wander as her thoughts had
already insisted on wandering.

But Nancy's Sunday thoughts were rarely quite out of keeping with the
devout and reverential intention implied by the book spread open before
her.  She was not theologically instructed enough to discern very
clearly the relation between the sacred documents of the past which she
opened without method, and her own obscure, simple life; but the spirit
of rectitude, and the sense of responsibility for the effect of her
conduct on others, which were strong elements in Nancy's character, had
made it a habit with her to scrutinize her past feelings and actions
with self-questioning solicitude.  Her mind not being courted by a
great variety of subjects, she filled the vacant moments by living
inwardly, again and again, through all her remembered experience,
especially through the fifteen years of her married time, in which her
life and its significance had been doubled.  She recalled the small
details, the words, tones, and looks, in the critical scenes which had
opened a new epoch for her by giving her a deeper insight into the
relations and trials of life, or which had called on her for some
little effort of forbearance, or of painful adherence to an imagined or
real duty--asking herself continually whether she had been in any
respect blamable.  This excessive rumination and self-questioning is
perhaps a morbid habit inevitable to a mind of much moral sensibility
when shut out from its due share of outward activity and of practical
claims on its affections--inevitable to a noble-hearted, childless
woman, when her lot is narrow.  "I can do so little--have I done it all
well?"  is the perpetually recurring thought; and there are no voices
calling her away from that soliloquy, no peremptory demands to divert
energy from vain regret or superfluous scruple.

There was one main thread of painful experience in Nancy's married
life, and on it hung certain deeply-felt scenes, which were the
oftenest revived in retrospect.  The short dialogue with Priscilla in
the garden had determined the current of retrospect in that frequent
direction this particular Sunday afternoon.  The first wandering of her
thought from the text, which she still attempted dutifully to follow
with her eyes and silent lips, was into an imaginary enlargement of the
defence she had set up for her husband against Priscilla's implied
blame.  The vindication of the loved object is the best balm affection
can find for its wounds:--"A man must have so much on his mind," is the
belief by which a wife often supports a cheerful face under rough
answers and unfeeling words.  And Nancy's deepest wounds had all come
from the perception that the absence of children from their hearth was
dwelt on in her husband's mind as a privation to which he could not
reconcile himself.

Yet sweet Nancy might have been expected to feel still more keenly the
denial of a blessing to which she had looked forward with all the
varied expectations and preparations, solemn and prettily trivial,
which fill the mind of a loving woman when she expects to become a
mother.  Was there not a drawer filled with the neat work of her hands,
all unworn and untouched, just as she had arranged it there fourteen
years ago--just, but for one little dress, which had been made the
burial-dress?  But under this immediate personal trial Nancy was so
firmly unmurmuring, that years ago she had suddenly renounced the habit
of visiting this drawer, lest she should in this way be cherishing a
longing for what was not given.

Perhaps it was this very severity towards any indulgence of what she
held to be sinful regret in herself, that made her shrink from applying
her own standard to her husband.  "It is very different--it is much
worse for a man to be disappointed in that way: a woman can always be
satisfied with devoting herself to her husband, but a man wants
something that will make him look forward more--and sitting by the fire
is so much duller to him than to a woman."  And always, when Nancy
reached this point in her meditations--trying, with predetermined
sympathy, to see everything as Godfrey saw it--there came a renewal of
self-questioning.  _Had_ she done everything in her power to lighten
Godfrey's privation?  Had she really been right in the resistance which
had cost her so much pain six years ago, and again four years ago--the
resistance to her husband's wish that they should adopt a child?
Adoption was more remote from the ideas and habits of that time than of
our own; still Nancy had her opinion on it.  It was as necessary to her
mind to have an opinion on all topics, not exclusively masculine, that
had come under her notice, as for her to have a precisely marked place
for every article of her personal property: and her opinions were
always principles to be unwaveringly acted on.  They were firm, not
because of their basis, but because she held them with a tenacity
inseparable from her mental action.  On all the duties and proprieties
of life, from filial behaviour to the arrangements of the evening
toilette, pretty Nancy Lammeter, by the time she was three-and-twenty,
had her unalterable little code, and had formed every one of her habits
in strict accordance with that code.  She carried these decided
judgments within her in the most unobtrusive way: they rooted
themselves in her mind, and grew there as quietly as grass.  Years ago,
we know, she insisted on dressing like Priscilla, because "it was right
for sisters to dress alike", and because "she would do what was right
if she wore a gown dyed with cheese-colouring".  That was a trivial but
typical instance of the mode in which Nancy's life was regulated.

It was one of those rigid principles, and no petty egoistic feeling,
which had been the ground of Nancy's difficult resistance to her
husband's wish.  To adopt a child, because children of your own had
been denied you, was to try and choose your lot in spite of Providence:
the adopted child, she was convinced, would never turn out well, and
would be a curse to those who had wilfully and rebelliously sought what
it was clear that, for some high reason, they were better without.
When you saw a thing was not meant to be, said Nancy, it was a bounden
duty to leave off so much as wishing for it.  And so far, perhaps, the
wisest of men could scarcely make more than a verbal improvement in her
principle.  But the conditions under which she held it apparent that a
thing was not meant to be, depended on a more peculiar mode of
thinking.  She would have given up making a purchase at a particular
place if, on three successive times, rain, or some other cause of
Heaven's sending, had formed an obstacle; and she would have
anticipated a broken limb or other heavy misfortune to any one who
persisted in spite of such indications.

"But why should you think the child would turn out ill?"  said Godfrey,
in his remonstrances.  "She has thriven as well as child can do with
the weaver; and _he_ adopted her.  There isn't such a pretty little
girl anywhere else in the parish, or one fitter for the station we
could give her.  Where can be the likelihood of her being a curse to
anybody?"

"Yes, my dear Godfrey," said Nancy, who was sitting with her hands
tightly clasped together, and with yearning, regretful affection in her
eyes.  "The child may not turn out ill with the weaver.  But, then, he
didn't go to seek her, as we should be doing.  It will be wrong: I feel
sure it will.  Don't you remember what that lady we met at the Royston
Baths told us about the child her sister adopted? That was the only
adopting I ever heard of: and the child was transported when it was
twenty-three.  Dear Godfrey, don't ask me to do what I know is wrong: I
should never be happy again.  I know it's very hard for _you_--it's
easier for me--but it's the will of Providence."

It might seem singular that Nancy--with her religious theory pieced
together out of narrow social traditions, fragments of church doctrine
imperfectly understood, and girlish reasonings on her small
experience--should have arrived by herself at a way of thinking so
nearly akin to that of many devout people, whose beliefs are held in
the shape of a system quite remote from her knowledge--singular, if we
did not know that human beliefs, like all other natural growths, elude
the barriers of system.

Godfrey had from the first specified Eppie, then about twelve years
old, as a child suitable for them to adopt.  It had never occurred to
him that Silas would rather part with his life than with Eppie. Surely
the weaver would wish the best to the child he had taken so much
trouble with, and would be glad that such good fortune should happen to
her: she would always be very grateful to him, and he would be well
provided for to the end of his life--provided for as the excellent part
he had done by the child deserved.  Was it not an appropriate thing for
people in a higher station to take a charge off the hands of a man in a
lower?  It seemed an eminently appropriate thing to Godfrey, for
reasons that were known only to himself; and by a common fallacy, he
imagined the measure would be easy because he had private motives for
desiring it.  This was rather a coarse mode of estimating Silas's
relation to Eppie; but we must remember that many of the impressions
which Godfrey was likely to gather concerning the labouring people
around him would favour the idea that deep affections can hardly go
along with callous palms and scant means; and he had not had the
opportunity, even if he had had the power, of entering intimately into
all that was exceptional in the weaver's experience.  It was only the
want of adequate knowledge that could have made it possible for Godfrey
deliberately to entertain an unfeeling project: his natural kindness
had outlived that blighting time of cruel wishes, and Nancy's praise of
him as a husband was not founded entirely on a wilful illusion.

"I was right," she said to herself, when she had recalled all their
scenes of discussion--"I feel I was right to say him nay, though it
hurt me more than anything; but how good Godfrey has been about it!
Many men would have been very angry with me for standing out against
their wishes; and they might have thrown out that they'd had ill-luck
in marrying me; but Godfrey has never been the man to say me an unkind
word.  It's only what he can't hide: everything seems so blank to him,
I know; and the land--what a difference it 'ud make to him, when he
goes to see after things, if he'd children growing up that he was doing
it all for!  But I won't murmur; and perhaps if he'd married a woman
who'd have had children, she'd have vexed him in other ways."

This possibility was Nancy's chief comfort; and to give it greater
strength, she laboured to make it impossible that any other wife should
have had more perfect tenderness.  She had been _forced_ to vex him by
that one denial.  Godfrey was not insensible to her loving effort, and
did Nancy no injustice as to the motives of her obstinacy.  It was
impossible to have lived with her fifteen years and not be aware that
an unselfish clinging to the right, and a sincerity clear as the
flower-born dew, were her main characteristics; indeed, Godfrey felt
this so strongly, that his own more wavering nature, too averse to
facing difficulty to be unvaryingly simple and truthful, was kept in a
certain awe of this gentle wife who watched his looks with a yearning
to obey them.  It seemed to him impossible that he should ever confess
to her the truth about Eppie: she would never recover from the
repulsion the story of his earlier marriage would create, told to her
now, after that long concealment.  And the child, too, he thought, must
become an object of repulsion: the very sight of her would be painful.
