chest,--which stood opposite the foot of Mr. Tulliver's bed,--and
propping the lid with the iron holder, without much noise.

"There's a tin box," whispered Mr. Glegg; "he'd most like put a small
thing like a note in there. Lift it out, Tom; but I'll just lift up
these deeds,--they're the deeds o' the house and mill, I suppose,--and
see what there is under 'em."

Mr. Glegg had lifted out the parchments, and had fortunately drawn
back a little, when the iron holder gave way, and the heavy lid fell
with a loud bang that resounded over the house.

Perhaps there was something in that sound more than the mere fact of
the strong vibration that produced the instantaneous effect on the
frame of the prostrate man, and for the time completely shook off the
obstruction of paralysis. The chest had belonged to his father and his
father's father, and it had always been rather a solemn business to
visit it. All long-known objects, even a mere window fastening or a
particular door-latch, have sounds which are a sort of recognized
voice to us,--a voice that will thrill and awaken, when it has been
used to touch deep-lying fibres. In the same moment, when all the eyes
in the room were turned upon him, he started up and looked at the
chest, the parchments in Mr. Glegg's hand, and Tom holding the tin
box, with a glance of perfect consciousness and recognition.

"What are you going to do with those deeds?" he said, in his ordinary
tone of sharp questioning whenever he was irritated. "Come here, Tom.
What do you do, going to my chest?"

Tom obeyed, with some trembling; it was the first time his father had
recognized him. But instead of saying anything more to him, his father
continued to look with a growing distinctness of suspicion at Mr.
Glegg and the deeds.

"What's been happening, then?" he said sharply. "What are you meddling
with my deeds for? Is Wakem laying hold of everything? Why don't you
tell me what you've been a-doing?" he added impatiently, as Mr. Glegg
advanced to the foot of the bed before speaking.

"No, no, friend Tulliver," said Mr. Glegg, in a soothing tone.
"Nobody's getting hold of anything as yet. We only came to look and
see what was in the chest. You've been ill, you know, and we've had to
look after things a bit. But let's hope you'll soon be well enough to
attend to everything yourself."

Mr. Tulliver looked around him meditatively, at Tom, at Mr. Glegg, and
at Maggie; then suddenly appearing aware that some one was seated by
his side at the head of the bed he turned sharply round and saw his
sister.

"Eh, Gritty!" he said, in the half-sad, affectionate tone in which he
had been wont to speak to her. "What! you're there, are you? How could
you manage to leave the children?"

"Oh, brother!" said good Mrs. Moss, too impulsive to be prudent, "I'm
thankful I'm come now to see you yourself again; I thought you'd never
know us any more."

"What! have I had a stroke?" said Mr. Tulliver, anxiously, looking at
Mr. Glegg.

"A fall from your horse--shook you a bit,--that's all, I think," said
Mr. Glegg. "But you'll soon get over it, let's hope."

Mr. Tulliver fixed his eyes on the bed-clothes, and remained silent
for two or three minutes. A new shadow came over his face. He looked
up at Maggie first, and said in a lower tone, "You got the letter,
then, my wench?"

"Yes, father," she said, kissing him with a full heart. She felt as if
her father were come back to her from the dead, and her yearning to
show him how she had always loved him could be fulfilled.

"Where's your mother?" he said, so preoccupied that he received the
kiss as passively as some quiet animal might have received it.

"She's downstairs with my aunts, father. Shall I fetch her?"

"Ay, ay; poor Bessy!" and his eyes turned toward Tom as Maggie left
the room.

"You'll have to take care of 'em both if I die, you know, Tom. You'll
be badly off, I doubt. But you must see and pay everybody. And
mind,--there's fifty pound o' Luke's as I put into the business,--he
gave me a bit at a time, and he's got nothing to show for it. You must
pay him first thing."

Uncle Glegg involuntarily shook his head, and looked more concerned
than ever, but Tom said firmly:

"Yes, father. And haven't you a note from my uncle Moss for three
hundred pounds? We came to look for that. What do you wish to be done
about it, father?"

"Ah! I'm glad you thought o' that, my lad," said Mr. Tulliver. "I
allays meant to be easy about that money, because o' your aunt. You
mustn't mind losing the money, if they can't pay it,--and it's like
enough they can't. The note's in that box, mind! I allays meant to be
good to you, Gritty," said Mr. Tulliver, turning to his sister; "but
you know you aggravated me when you would have Moss."

At this moment Maggie re-entered with her mother, who came in much
agitated by the news that her husband was quite himself again.

"Well, Bessy," he said, as she kissed him, "you must forgive me if
you're worse off than you ever expected to be. But it's the fault o'
the law,--it's none o' mine," he added angrily. "It's the fault o'
raskills. Tom, you mind this: if ever you've got the chance, you make
Wakem smart. If you don't, you're a good-for-nothing son. You might
horse-whip him, but he'd set the law on you,--the law's made to take
care o' raskills."

Mr. Tulliver was getting excited, and an alarming flush was on his
face. Mr. Glegg wanted to say something soothing, but he was prevented
by Mr. Tulliver's speaking again to his wife. "They'll make a shift to
pay everything, Bessy," he said, "and yet leave you your furniture;
and your sisters'll do something for you--and Tom'll grow up--though
what he's to be I don't know--I've done what I could--I've given him a
eddication--and there's the little wench, she'll get married--but it's
a poor tale----"

The sanative effect of the strong vibration was exhausted, and with
the last words the poor man fell again, rigid and insensible. Though
this was only a recurrence of what had happened before, it struck all
present as if it had been death, not only from its contrast with the
completeness of the revival, but because his words had all had
reference to the possibility that his death was near. But with poor
Tulliver death was not to be a leap; it was to be a long descent under
thickening shadows.

Mr. Turnbull was sent for; but when he heard what had passed, he said
this complete restoration, though only temporary, was a hopeful sign,
proving that there was no permanent lesion to prevent ultimate
recovery.

Among the threads of the past which the stricken man had gathered up,
he had omitted the bill of sale; the flash of memory had only lit up
prominent ideas, and he sank into forgetfulness again with half his
humiliation unlearned.

But Tom was clear upon two points,--that his uncle Moss's note must be
destroyed; and that Luke's money must be paid, if in no other way, out
of his own and Maggie's money now in the savings bank. There were
subjects, you perceive, on which Tom was much quicker than on the
niceties of classical construction, or the relations of a mathematical
demonstration.



Chapter V

Tom Applies His Knife to the Oyster


The next day, at ten o'clock, Tom was on his way to St. Ogg's, to see
his uncle Deane, who was to come home last night, his aunt had said;
and Tom had made up his mind that his uncle Deane was the right person
to ask for advice about getting some employment. He was in a great way
of business; he had not the narrow notions of uncle Glegg; and he had
risen in the world on a scale of advancement which accorded with Tom's
ambition.

It was a dark, chill, misty morning, likely to end in rain,--one of
those mornings when even happy people take refuge in their hopes. And
Tom was very unhappy; he felt the humiliation as well as the
prospective hardships of his lot with all the keenness of a proud
nature; and with all his resolute dutifulness toward his father there
mingled an irrepressible indignation against him which gave misfortune
the less endurable aspect of a wrong. Since these were the
consequences of going to law, his father was really blamable, as his
aunts and uncles had always said he was; and it was a significant
indication of Tom's character, that though he thought his aunts ought
to do something more for his mother, he felt nothing like Maggie's
violent resentment against them for showing no eager tenderness and
generosity. There were no impulses in Tom that led him to expect what
did not present itself to him as a right to be demanded. Why should
people give away their money plentifully to those who had not taken
care of their own money? Tom saw some justice in severity; and all the
more, because he had confidence in himself that he should never
deserve that just severity. It was very hard upon him that he should
be put at this disadvantage in life by his father's want of prudence;
but he was not going to complain and to find fault with people because
they did not make everything easy for him. He would ask no one to help
him, more than to give him work and pay him for it. Poor Tom was not
without his hopes to take refuge in under the chill damp imprisonment
of the December fog, which seemed only like a part of his home
troubles. At sixteen, the mind that has the strongest affinity for
fact cannot escape illusion and self-flattery; and Tom, in sketching
his future, had no other guide in arranging his facts than the
suggestions of his own brave self-reliance. Both Mr. Glegg and Mr.
Deane, he knew, had been very poor once; he did not want to save money
slowly and retire on a moderate fortune like his uncle Glegg, but he
would be like his uncle Deane--get a situation in some great house of
business and rise fast. He had scarcely seen anything of his uncle
Deane for the last three years--the two families had been getting
wider apart; but for this very reason Tom was the more hopeful about
applying to him. His uncle Glegg, he felt sure, would never encourage
any spirited project, but he had a vague imposing idea of the
resources at his uncle Deane's command. He had heard his father say,
long ago, how Deane had made himself so valuable to Guest & Co. that
they were glad enough to offer him a share in the business; that was
what Tom resolved _he_ would do. It was intolerable to think of being
poor and looked down upon all one's life. He would provide for his
mother and sister, and make every one say that he was a man of high
character. He leaped over the years in this way, and, in the haste of
strong purpose and strong desire, did not see how they would be made
up of slow days, hours, and minutes.

By the time he had crossed the stone bridge over the Floss and was
entering St. Ogg's, he was thinking that he would buy his father's
mill and land again when he was rich enough, and improve the house and
live there; he should prefer it to any smarter, newer place, and he
could keep as many horses and dogs as he liked.

Walking along the street with a firm, rapid step, at this point in his
reverie he was startled by some one who had crossed without his
notice, and who said to him in a rough, familiar voice:

"Why, Master Tom, how's your father this morning?" It was a publican
of St. Ogg's, one of his father's customers.

Tom disliked being spoken to just then; but he said civilly, "He's
still very ill, thank you."

"Ay, it's been a sore chance for you, young man, hasn't it,--this
lawsuit turning out against him?" said the publican, with a confused,
beery idea of being good-natured.

Tom reddened and passed on; he would have felt it like the handling of
a bruise, even if there had been the most polite and delicate
reference to his position.

"That's Tulliver's son," said the publican to a grocer standing on the
adjacent door-step.

"Ah!" said the grocer, "I thought I knew his features. He takes after
his mother's family; she was a Dodson. He's a fine, straight youth;
what's he been brought up to?"

"Oh! to turn up his nose at his father's customers, and be a fine
gentleman,--not much else, I think."

Tom, roused from his dream of the future to a thorough consciousness
of the present, made all the greater haste to reach the warehouse
offices of Guest & Co., where he expected to find his uncle Deane. But
this was Mr. Deane's morning at the band, a clerk told him, and with
some contempt for his ignorance; Mr. Deane was not to be found in
River Street on a Thursday morning.

At the bank Tom was admitted into the private room where his uncle
was, immediately after sending in his name. Mr. Deane was auditing
accounts; but he looked up as Tom entered, and putting out his hand,
said, "Well, Tom, nothing fresh the matter at home, I hope? How's your
father?"

"Much the same, thank you, uncle," said Tom, feeling nervous. "But I
want to speak to you, please, when you're at liberty."

"Sit down, sit down," said Mr. Deane, relapsing into his accounts, in
which he and the managing-clerk remained so absorbed for the next
half-hour that Tom began to wonder whether he should have to sit in
this way till the bank closed,--there seemed so little tendency toward
a conclusion in the quiet, monotonous procedure of these sleek,
prosperous men of business. Would his uncle give him a place in the
bank? It would be very dull, prosy work, he thought, writing there
forever to the loud ticking of a timepiece. He preferred some other
way of getting rich. But at last there was a change; his uncle took a
pen and wrote something with a flourish at the end.

"You'll just step up to Torry's now, Mr. Spence, will you?" said Mr.
Deane, and the clock suddenly became less loud and deliberate in Tom's
ears.

"Well, Tom," said Mr. Deane, when they were alone, turning his
substantial person a little in his chair, and taking out his
snuff-box; "what's the business, my boy; what's the business?" Mr.
Deane, who had heard from his wife what had passed the day before,
thought Tom was come to appeal to him for some means of averting the
sale.

"I hope you'll excuse me for troubling you, uncle," said Tom,
coloring, but speaking in a tone which, though, tremulous, had a
certain proud independence in it; "but I thought you were the best
person to advise me what to do."

"Ah!" said Mr. Deane, reserving his pinch of snuff, and looking at Tom
with new attention, "let us hear."

"I want to get a situation, uncle, so that I may earn some money,"
said Tom, who never fell into circumlocution.

"A situation?" said Mr. Deane, and then took his pinch of snuff with
elaborate justice to each nostril. Tom thought snuff-taking a most
provoking habit.

"Why, let me see, how old are you?" said Mr. Deane, as he threw
himself backward again.

"Sixteen; I mean, I am going in seventeen," said Tom, hoping his uncle
noticed how much beard he had.

"Let me see; your father had some notion of making you an engineer, I
think?"

"But I don't think I could get any money at that for a long while,
could I?"

"That's true; but people don't get much money at anything, my boy,
when they're only sixteen. You've had a good deal of schooling,
however; I suppose you're pretty well up in accounts, eh? You
understand book keeping?"

"No," said Tom, rather falteringly. "I was in Practice. But Mr.
Stelling says I write a good hand, uncle. That's my writing," added
Tom, laying on the table a copy of the list he had made yesterday.

"Ah! that's good, that's good. But, you see, the best hand in the
world'll not get you a better place than a copying-clerk's, if you
know nothing of book-keeping,--nothing of accounts. And a
copying-clerk's a cheap article. But what have you been learning at
school, then?"

Mr. Deane had not occupied himself with methods of education, and had
no precise conception of what went forward in expensive schools.

"We learned Latin," said Tom, pausing a little between each item, as
if he were turning over the books in his school-desk to assist his
memory,--"a good deal of Latin; and the last year I did Themes, one
week in Latin and one in English; and Greek and Roman history; and
Euclid; and I began Algebra, but I left it off again; and we had one
day every week for Arithmetic. Then I used to have drawing-lessons;
and there were several other books we either read or learned out
of,--English Poetry, and Horæ Paulinæ and Blair's Rhetoric, the last
half."

Mr. Deane tapped his snuff-box again and screwed up his mouth; he felt
in the position of many estimable persons when they had read the New
Tariff, and found how many commodities were imported of which they
knew nothing; like a cautious man of business, he was not going to
speak rashly of a raw material in which he had had no experience. But
the presumption was, that if it had been good for anything, so
successful a man as himself would hardly have been ignorant of it.

About Latin he had an opinion, and thought that in case of another
war, since people would no longer wear hair-powder, it would be well
to put a tax upon Latin, as a luxury much run upon by the higher
classes, and not telling at all on the ship-owning department. But,
for what he knew, the Horæ Paulinæ might be something less neutral. On
the whole, this list of acquirements gave him a sort of repulsion
toward poor Tom.

"Well," he said at last, in rather a cold, sardonic tone, "you've had
three years at these things,--you must be pretty strong in 'em. Hadn't
you better take up some line where they'll come in handy?"

Tom colored, and burst out, with new energy:

"I'd rather not have any employment of that sort, uncle. I don't like
Latin and those things. I don't know what I could do with them unless
I went as usher in a school; and I don't know them well enough for
that! besides, I would as soon carry a pair of panniers. I don't want
to be that sort of person. I should like to enter into some business
where I can get on,--a manly business, where I should have to look
after things, and get credit for what I did. And I shall want to keep
my mother and sister."

"Ah, young gentleman," said Mr. Deane, with that tendency to repress
youthful hopes which stout and successful men of fifty find one of
their easiest duties, "that's sooner said than done,--sooner said than
done."

"But didn't _you_ get on in that way, uncle?" said Tom, a little
irritated that Mr. Deane did not enter more rapidly into his views. "I
mean, didn't you rise from one place to another through your abilities
and good conduct?"

"Ay, ay, sir," said Mr. Deane, spreading himself in his chair a
little, and entering with great readiness into a retrospect of his own
career. "But I'll tell you how I got on. It wasn't by getting astride
a stick and thinking it would turn into a horse if I sat on it long
enough. I kept my eyes and ears open, sir, and I wasn't too fond of my
own back, and I made my master's interest my own. Why, with only
looking into what went on in the mill, I found out how there was a
waste of five hundred a-year that might be hindered. Why, sir, I
hadn't more schooling to begin with than a charity boy; but I saw
pretty soon that I couldn't get on far enough without mastering
accounts, and I learned 'em between working hours, after I'd been
unlading. Look here." Mr. Deane opened a book and pointed to the page.
"I write a good hand enough, and I'll match anybody at all sorts of
reckoning by the head; and I got it all by hard work, and paid for it
out of my own earnings,--often out of my own dinner and supper. And I
looked into the nature of all the things we had to do in the business,
and picked up knowledge as I went about my work, and turned it over in
my head. Why, I'm no mechanic,--I never pretended to be--but I've
thought of a thing or two that the mechanics never thought of, and
it's made a fine difference in our returns. And there isn't an article
shipped or unshipped at our wharf but I know the quality of it. If I
got places, sir, it was because I made myself fit for 'em. If you want
to slip into a round hole, you must make a ball of yourself; that's
where it is."

Mr. Deane tapped his box again. He had been led on by pure enthusiasm
in his subject, and had really forgotten what bearing this
retrospective survey had on his listener. He had found occasion for
saying the same thing more than once before, and was not distinctly
aware that he had not his port-wine before him.

"Well, uncle," said Tom, with a slight complaint in his tone, "that's
what I should like to do. Can't _I_ get on in the same way?"

"In the same way?" said Mr. Deane, eyeing Tom with quiet deliberation.
"There go two or three questions to that, Master Tom. That depends on
what sort of material you are, to begin with, and whether you've been
put into the right mill. But I'll tell you what it is. Your poor
father went the wrong way to work in giving you an education. It
wasn't my business, and I didn't interfere; but it is as I thought it
would be. You've had a sort of learning that's all very well for a
young fellow like our Mr. Stephen Guest, who'll have nothing to do but
sign checks all his life, and may as well have Latin inside his head
as any other sort of stuffing."

"But, uncle," said Tom, earnestly, "I don't see why the Latin need
hinder me from getting on in business. I shall soon forget it all; it
makes no difference to me. I had to do my lessons at school, but I
always thought they'd never be of any use to me afterward; I didn't
care about them."

"Ay, ay, that's all very well," said Mr. Deane; "but it doesn't alter
what I was going to say. Your Latin and rigmarole may soon dry off
you, but you'll be but a bare stick after that. Besides, it's whitened
your hands and taken the rough work out of you. And what do you know?
Why, you know nothing about book-keeping, to begin with, and not so
much of reckoning as a common shopman. You'll have to begin at a low
round of the ladder, let me tell you, if you mean to get on in life.
It's no use forgetting the education your father's been paying for, if
you don't give yourself a new un."

Tom bit his lips hard; he felt as if the tears were rising, and he
would rather die than let them.

"You want me to help you to a situation," Mr. Deane went on; "well,
I've no fault to find with that. I'm willing to do something for you.
But you youngsters nowadays think you're to begin with living well and
working easy; you've no notion of running afoot before you get
horseback. Now, you must remember what you are,--you're a lad of
sixteen, trained to nothing particular. There's heaps of your sort,
like so many pebbles, made to fit in nowhere. Well, you might be
apprenticed to some business,--a chemist's and druggist's perhaps;
your Latin might come in a bit there----"

Tom was going to speak, but Mr. Deane put up his hand and said:

"Stop! hear what I've got to say. You don't want to be a 'prentice,--I
know, I know,--you want to make more haste, and you don't want to
stand behind a counter. But if you're a copying-clerk, you'll have to
stand behind a desk, and stare at your ink and paper all day; there
isn't much out-look there, and you won't be much wiser at the end of
the year than at the beginning. The world isn't made of pen, ink, and
paper, and if you're to get on in the world, young man, you must know
what the world's made of. Now the best chance for you 'ud be to have a
place on a wharf, or in a warehouse, where you'd learn the smell of
things, but you wouldn't like that, I'll be bound; you'd have to stand
cold and wet, and be shouldered about by rough fellows. You're too
fine a gentleman for that."

Mr. Deane paused and looked hard at Tom, who certainly felt some
inward struggle before he could reply.

"I would rather do what will be best for me in the end, sir; I would
put up with what was disagreeable."

"That's well, if you can carry it out. But you must remember it isn't
only laying hold of a rope, you must go on pulling. It's the mistake
you lads make that have got nothing either in your brains or your
pocket, to think you've got a better start in the world if you stick
yourselves in a place where you can keep your coats clean, and have
the shopwenches take you for fine gentlemen. That wasn't the way _I_
started, young man; when I was sixteen, my jacket smelt of tar, and I
wasn't afraid of handling cheeses. That's the reason I can wear good
broadcloth now, and have my legs under the same table with the head
of the best firms in St. Ogg's."

Uncle Deane tapped his box, and seemed to expand a little under his
waistcoat and gold chain, as he squared his shoulders in the chair.

"Is there any place at liberty that you know of now, uncle, that I
should do for? I should like to set to work at once," said Tom, with a
slight tremor in his voice.

"Stop a bit, stop a bit; we mustn't be in too great a hurry. You must
bear in mind, if I put you in a place you're a bit young for, because
you happen to be my nephew, I shall be responsible for you. And
there's no better reason, you know, than your being my nephew; because
it remains to be seen whether you're good for anything."

"I hope I shall never do you any discredit, uncle," said Tom, hurt, as
all boys are at the statement of the unpleasant truth that people feel
no ground for trusting them. "I care about my own credit too much for
that."

"Well done, Tom, well done! That's the right spirit, and I never
refuse to help anybody if they've a mind to do themselves justice.
There's a young man of two-and-twenty I've got my eye on now. I shall
do what I can for that young man; he's got some pith in him. But then,
you see, he's made good use of his time,--a first-rate calculator,--
can tell you the cubic contents of anything in no time, and put me up
the other day to a new market for Swedish bark; he's uncommonly
knowing in manufactures, that young fellow."

"I'd better set about learning book-keeping, hadn't I, uncle?" said
Tom, anxious to prove his readiness to exert himself.

"Yes, yes, you can't do amiss there. But--Ah, Spence, you're back
again. Well Tom, there's nothing more to be said just now, I think,
and I must go to business again. Good-by. Remember me to your mother."

Mr. Deane put out his hand, with an air of friendly dismissal, and Tom
had not courage to ask another question, especially in the presence of
Mr. Spence. So he went out again into the cold damp air. He had to
call at his uncle Glegg's about the money in the Savings Bank, and by
the time he set out again the mist had thickened, and he could not see
very far before him; but going along River Street again, he was
startled, when he was within two yards of the projecting side of a
shop-window, by the words "Dorlcote Mill" in large letters on a
hand-bill, placed as if on purpose to stare at him. It was the
catalogue of the sale to take place the next week; it was a reason for
hurrying faster out of the town.

Poor Tom formed no visions of the distant future as he made his way
homeward; he only felt that the present was very hard. It seemed a
wrong toward him that his uncle Deane had no confidence in him,--did
not see at once that he should acquit himself well, which Tom himself
was as certain of as of the daylight. Apparently he, Tom Tulliver, was
likely to be held of small account in the world; and for the first
time he felt a sinking of heart under the sense that he really was
very ignorant, and could do very little. Who was that enviable young
man that could tell the cubic contents of things in no time, and make
suggestions about Swedish bark! Tom had been used to be so entirely
satisfied with himself, in spite of his breaking down in a
demonstration, and construing _nunc illas promite vires_ as "now
promise those men"; but now he suddenly felt at a disadvantage,
because he knew less than some one else knew. There must be a world of
things connected with that Swedish bark, which, if he only knew them,
might have helped him to get on. It would have been much easier to
make a figure with a spirited horse and a new saddle.

Two hours ago, as Tom was walking to St. Ogg's, he saw the distant
future before him as he might have seen a tempting stretch of smooth
sandy beach beyond a belt of flinty shingles; he was on the grassy
bank then, and thought the shingles might soon be passed. But now his
feet were on the sharp stones; the belt of shingles had widened, and
the stretch of sand had dwindled into narrowness.

"What did my Uncle Deane say, Tom?" said Maggie, putting her arm
through Tom's as he was warming himself rather drearily by the kitchen
fire. "Did he say he would give you a situation?"

"No, he didn't say that. He didn't quite promise me anything; he
seemed to think I couldn't have a very good situation. I'm too young."

"But didn't he speak kindly, Tom?"

"Kindly? Pooh! what's the use of talking about that? I wouldn't care
about his speaking kindly, if I could get a situation. But it's such a
nuisance and bother; I've been at school all this while learning Latin
and things,--not a bit of good to me,--and now my uncle says I must
set about learning book-keeping and calculation, and those things. He
seems to make out I'm good for nothing."

Tom's mouth twitched with a bitter expression as he looked at the
fire.

"Oh, what a pity we haven't got Dominie Sampson!" said Maggie, who
couldn't help mingling some gayety with their sadness. "If he had
taught me book-keeping by double entry and after the Italian method,
as he did Lucy Bertram, I could teach you, Tom."

"_You_ teach! Yes, I dare say. That's always the tone you take," said
Tom.

"Dear Tom, I was only joking," said Maggie, putting her cheek against
his coat-sleeve.

"But it's always the same, Maggie," said Tom, with the little frown he
put on when he was about to be justifiably severe. "You're always
setting yourself up above me and every one else, and I've wanted to
tell you about it several times. You ought not to have spoken as you
did to my uncles and aunts; you should leave it to me to take care of
my mother and you, and not put yourself forward. You think you know
better than any one, but you're almost always wrong. I can judge much
better than you can."

Poor Tom! he had just come from being lectured and made to feel his
inferiority; the reaction of his strong, self-asserting nature must
take place somehow; and here was a case in which he could justly show
himself dominant. Maggie's cheek flushed and her lip quivered with
conflicting resentment and affection, and a certain awe as well as
admiration of Tom's firmer and more effective character. She did not
answer immediately; very angry words rose to her lips, but they were
driven back again, and she said at last:

"You often think I'm conceited, Tom, when I don't mean what I say at
all in that way. I don't mean to put myself above you; I know you
behaved better than I did yesterday. But you are always so harsh to
me, Tom."

With the last words the resentment was rising again.

"No, I'm not harsh," said Tom, with severe decision. "I'm always kind
to you, and so I shall be; I shall always take care of you. But you
must mind what I say."

Their mother came in now, and Maggie rushed away, that her burst of
tears, which she felt must come, might not happen till she was safe
upstairs. They were very bitter tears; everybody in the world seemed
so hard and unkind to Maggie; there was no indulgence, no fondness,
such as she imagined when she fashioned the world afresh in her own
thoughts. In books there were people who were always agreeable or
tender, and delighted to do things that made one happy, and who did
not show their kindness by finding fault. The world outside the books
was not a happy one, Maggie felt; it seemed to be a world where people
behaved the best to those they did not pretend to love, and that did
not belong to them. And if life had no love in it, what else was there
for Maggie? Nothing but poverty and the companionship of her mother's
narrow griefs, perhaps of her father's heart-cutting childish
dependence. There is no hopelessness so sad as that of early youth,
when the soul is made up of wants, and has no long memories, no
superadded life in the life of others; though we who looked on think
lightly of such premature despair, as if our vision of the future
lightened the blind sufferer's present.

Maggie, in her brown frock, with her eyes reddened and her heavy hair
pushed back, looking from the bed where her father lay to the dull
walls of this sad chamber which was the centre of her world, was a
creature full of eager, passionate longings for all that was beautiful
and glad; thirsty for all knowledge; with an ear straining after
dreamy music that died away and would not come near to her; with a
blind, unconscious yearning for something that would link together the
wonderful impressions of this mysterious life, and give her soul a
sense of home in it.

No wonder, when there is this contrast between the outward and the
inward, that painful collisions come of it.



Chapter VI

Tending to Refute the Popular Prejudice against the Present of a
Pocket-Knife


In that dark time of December, the sale of the household furniture
lasted beyond the middle of the second day. Mr. Tulliver, who had
begun, in his intervals of consciousness, to manifest an irritability
which often appeared to have as a direct effect the recurrence of
spasmodic rigidity and insensibility, had lain in this living death
throughout the critical hours when the noise of the sale came nearest
to his chamber. Mr. Turnbull had decided that it would be a less risk
to let him remain where he was than to remove him to Luke's
cottage,--a plan which the good Luke had proposed to Mrs. Tulliver,
thinking it would be very bad if the master were "to waken up" at the
noise of the sale; and the wife and children had sat imprisoned in the
silent chamber, watching the large prostrate figure on the bed, and
trembling lest the blank face should suddenly show some response to
the sounds which fell on their own ears with such obstinate, painful
repetition.

But it was over at last, that time of importunate certainty and
eye-straining suspense. The sharp sound of a voice, almost as metallic
as the rap that followed it, had ceased; the tramping of footsteps on
the gravel had died out. Mrs. Tulliver's blond face seemed aged ten
years by the last thirty hours; the poor woman's mind had been busy
divining when her favorite things were being knocked down by the
terrible hammer; her heart had been fluttering at the thought that
first one thing and then another had gone to be identified as hers in
the hateful publicity of the Golden Lion; and all the while she had to
sit and make no sign of this inward agitation. Such things bring lines
in well-rounded faces, and broaden the streaks of white among the
hairs that once looked as if they had been dipped in pure sunshine.
Already, at three o'clock, Kezia, the good-hearted, bad-tempered
housemaid, who regarded all people that came to the sale as her
personal enemies, the dirt on whose feet was of a peculiarly vile
quality, had begun to scrub and swill with an energy much assisted by
a continual low muttering against "folks as came to buy up other
folk's things," and made light of "scrazing" the tops of mahogany
tables over which better folks than themselves had had to--suffer a
waste of tissue through evaporation. She was not scrubbing
indiscriminately, for there would be further dirt of the same
atrocious kind made by people who had still to fetch away their
purchases; but she was bent on bringing the parlor, where that
"pipe-smoking pig," the bailiff, had sat, to such an appearance of
scant comfort as could be given to it by cleanliness and the few
articles of furniture bought in for the family. Her mistress and the
young folks should have their tea in it that night, Kezia was
determined.

It was between five and six o'clock, near the usual teatime, when she
came upstairs and said that Master Tom was wanted. The person who
wanted him was in the kitchen, and in the first moments, by the
imperfect fire and candle light, Tom had not even an indefinite sense
of any acquaintance with the rather broad-set but active figure,
perhaps two years older than himself, that looked at him with a pair
of blue eyes set in a disc of freckles, and pulled some curly red
locks with a strong intention of respect. A low-crowned
oilskin-covered hat, and a certain shiny deposit of dirt on the rest
of the costume, as of tablets prepared for writing upon, suggested a
calling that had to do with boats; but this did not help Tom's memory.

"Sarvant, Master Tom," said he of the red locks, with a smile which
seemed to break through a self-imposed air of melancholy. "You don't
know me again, I doubt," he went on, as Tom continued to look at him
inquiringly; "but I'd like to talk to you by yourself a bit, please."

"There's a fire i' the parlor, Master Tom," said Kezia, who objected
to leaving the kitchen in the crisis of toasting.

"Come this way, then," said Tom, wondering if this young fellow
belonged to Guest & Co.'s Wharf, for his imagination ran continually
toward that particular spot; and uncle Deane might any time be sending
for him to say that there was a situation at liberty.

The bright fire in the parlor was the only light that showed the few
chairs, the bureau, the carpetless floor, and the one table--no, not
the _one_ table; there was a second table, in a corner, with a large
Bible and a few other books upon it. It was this new strange bareness
that Tom felt first, before he thought of looking again at the face
which was also lit up by the fire, and which stole a half-shy,
questioning glance at him as the entirely strange voice said:

"Why! you don't remember Bob, then, as you gen the pocket-knife to,
Mr. Tom?"

The rough-handled pocket-knife was taken out in the same moment, and
the largest blade opened by way of irresistible demonstration.

"What! Bob Jakin?" said Tom, not with any cordial delight, for he felt
a little ashamed of that early intimacy symbolized by the
pocket-knife, and was not at all sure that Bob's motives for recalling
it were entirely admirable.

"Ay, ay, Bob Jakin, if Jakin it must be, 'cause there's so many Bobs
as you went arter the squerrils with, that day as I plumped right down
from the bough, and bruised my shins a good un--but I got the squerril
tight for all that, an' a scratter it was. An' this littlish blade's
broke, you see, but I wouldn't hev a new un put in, 'cause they might
be cheatin' me an' givin' me another knife instid, for there isn't
such a blade i' the country,--it's got used to my hand, like. An'
there was niver nobody else gen me nothin' but what I got by my own
sharpness, only you, Mr. Tom; if it wasn't Bill Fawks as gen me the
terrier pup istid o' drowndin't it, an' I had to jaw him a good un
afore he'd give it me."

Bob spoke with a sharp and rather treble volubility, and got through
his long speech with surprising despatch, giving the blade of his
knife an affectionate rub on his sleeve when he had finished.

"Well, Bob," said Tom, with a slight air of patronage, the foregoing
reminscences having disposed him to be as friendly as was becoming,
though there was no part of his acquaintance with Bob that he
remembered better than the cause of their parting quarrel; "is there
anything I can do for you?"

"Why, no, Mr. Tom," answered Bob, shutting up his knife with a click
and returning it to his pocket, where he seemed to be feeling for
something else. "I shouldn't ha' come back upon you now ye're i'
trouble, an' folks say as the master, as I used to frighten the birds
for, an' he flogged me a bit for fun when he catched me eatin' the
turnip, as they say he'll niver lift up his head no more,--I shouldn't
ha' come now to ax you to gi' me another knife 'cause you gen me one
afore. If a chap gives me one black eye, that's enough for me; I
sha'n't ax him for another afore I sarve him out; an' a good turn's
worth as much as a bad un, anyhow. I shall niver grow down'ards again,
Mr. Tom, an' you war the little chap as I liked the best when _I_ war
a little chap, for all you leathered me, and wouldn't look at me
again. There's Dick Brumby, there, I could leather him as much as I'd
a mind; but lors! you get tired o' leatherin' a chap when you can
niver make him see what you want him to shy at. I'n seen chaps as 'ud
stand starin' at a bough till their eyes shot out, afore they'd see as
a bird's tail warn't a leaf. It's poor work goin' wi' such raff. But
you war allays a rare un at shying, Mr. Tom, an' I could trusten to
you for droppin' down wi' your stick in the nick o' time at a runnin'
rat, or a stoat, or that, when I war a-beatin' the bushes."

Bob had drawn out a dirty canvas bag, and would perhaps not have
paused just then if Maggie had not entered the room and darted a look
of surprise and curiosity at him, whereupon he pulled his red locks
again with due respect. But the next moment the sense of the altered
room came upon Maggie with a force that overpowered the thought of
Bob's presence. Her eyes had immediately glanced from him to the place
where the bookcase had hung; there was nothing now but the oblong
unfaded space on the wall, and below it the small table with the Bible
and the few other books.

"Oh, Tom!" she burst out, clasping her hands, "where are the books? I
thought my uncle Glegg said he would buy them. Didn't he? Are those
all they've left us?"

"I suppose so," said Tom, with a sort of desperate indifference. "Why
should they buy many books when they bought so little furniture?"

"Oh, but, Tom," said Maggie, her eyes filling with tears, as she
rushed up to the table to see what books had been rescued. "Our dear
old Pilgrim's Progress that you colored with your little paints; and
that picture of Pilgrim with a mantle on, looking just like a
turtle--oh dear!" Maggie went on, half sobbing as she turned over the
few books, "I thought we should never part with that while we lived;
everything is going away from us; the end of our lives will have
nothing in it like the beginning!"

Maggie turned away from the table and threw herself into a chair, with
the big tears ready to roll down her cheeks, quite blinded to the
presence of Bob, who was looking at her with the pursuant gaze of an
intelligent dumb animal, with perceptions more perfect than his
comprehension.

"Well, Bob," said Tom, feeling that the subject of the books was
unseasonable, "I suppose you just came to see me because we're in
trouble? That was very good-natured of you."

"I'll tell you how it is, Master Tom," said Bob, beginning to untwist
his canvas bag. "You see, I'n been with a barge this two 'ear; that's
how I'n been gettin' my livin',--if it wasn't when I was tentin' the
furnace, between whiles, at Torry's mill. But a fortni't ago I'd a
rare bit o' luck,--I allays thought I was a lucky chap, for I niver
set a trap but what I catched something; but this wasn't trap, it was
a fire i' Torry's mill, an' I doused it, else it 'ud set th' oil
alight, an' the genelman gen me ten suvreigns; he gen me 'em himself
last week. An' he said first, I was a sperrited chap,--but I knowed
that afore,--but then he outs wi' the ten suvreigns, an' that war
summat new. Here they are, all but one!" Here Bob emptied the canvas
bag on the table. "An' when I'd got 'em, my head was all of a boil
like a kettle o' broth, thinkin' what sort o' life I should take to,
for there war a many trades I'd thought on; for as for the barge, I'm
clean tired out wi't, for it pulls the days out till they're as long
as pigs' chitterlings. An' I thought first I'd ha' ferrets an' dogs,
an' be a rat-catcher; an' then I thought as I should like a bigger way
o' life, as I didn't know so well; for I'n seen to the bottom o'
rat-catching; an' I thought, an' thought, till at last I settled I'd
be a packman,--for they're knowin' fellers, the packmen are,--an' I'd
carry the lightest things I could i' my pack; an' there'd be a use for
a feller's tongue, as is no use neither wi' rats nor barges. An' I
should go about the country far an' wide, an' come round the women wi'
my tongue, an' get my dinner hot at the public,--lors! it 'ud be a
lovely life!"

Bob paused, and then said, with defiant decision, as if resolutely
turning his back on that paradisaic picture:

"But I don't mind about it, not a chip! An' I'n changed one o' the
suvreigns to buy my mother a goose for dinner, an' I'n bought a blue
plush wescoat, an' a sealskin cap,--for if I meant to be a packman,
I'd do it respectable. But I don't mind about it, not a chip! My yead
isn't a turnip, an' I shall p'r'aps have a chance o' dousing another
fire afore long. I'm a lucky chap. So I'll thank you to take the nine
suvreigns, Mr. Tom, and set yoursen up with 'em somehow, if it's true
as the master's broke. They mayn't go fur enough, but they'll help."

Tom was touched keenly enough to forget his pride and suspicion.

"You're a very kind fellow, Bob," he said, coloring, with that little
diffident tremor in his voice which gave a certain charm even to Tom's
pride and severity, "and I sha'n't forget you again, though I didn't
know you this evening. But I can't take the nine sovereigns; I should
be taking your little fortune from you, and they wouldn't do me much
good either."

"Wouldn't they, Mr. Tom?" said Bob, regretfully. "Now don't say so
'cause you think I want 'em. I aren't a poor chap. My mother gets a
good penn'orth wi' picking feathers an' things; an' if she eats
nothin' but bread-an'-water, it runs to fat. An' I'm such a lucky
chap; an' I doubt you aren't quite so lucky, Mr. Tom,--th' old master
isn't, anyhow,--an' so you might take a slice o' my luck, an' no harm
done. Lors! I found a leg o' pork i' the river one day; it had tumbled
out o' one o' them round-sterned Dutchmen, I'll be bound. Come, think
better on it, Mr. Tom, for old 'quinetance' sake, else I shall think
you bear me a grudge."

Bob pushed the sovereigns forward, but before Tom could speak Maggie,
clasping her hands, and looking penitently at Bob, said:

"Oh, I'm so sorry, Bob; I never thought you were so good. Why, I think
you're the kindest person in the world!"

Bob had not been aware of the injurious opinion for which Maggie was
performing an inward act of penitence, but he smiled with pleasure at
this handsome eulogy,--especially from a young lass who, as he
informed his mother that evening, had "such uncommon eyes, they looked
somehow as they made him feel nohow."

"No, indeed Bob, I can't take them," said Tom; "but don't think I feel
your kindness less because I say no. I don't want to take anything
from anybody, but to work my own way. And those sovereigns wouldn't
help me much--they wouldn't really--if I were to take them. Let me
shake hands with you instead."

Tom put out his pink palm, and Bob was not slow to place his hard,
grimy hand within it.

"Let me put the sovereigns in the bag again," said Maggie; "and you'll
come and see us when you've bought your pack, Bob."

"It's like as if I'd come out o' make believe, o' purpose to show 'em
you," said Bob, with an air of discontent, as Maggie gave him the bag
again, "a-taking 'em back i' this way. I _am_ a bit of a Do, you know;
but it isn't that sort o' Do,--it's on'y when a feller's a big rogue,
or a big flat, I like to let him in a bit, that's all."

"Now, don't you be up to any tricks, Bob," said Tom, "else you'll get
transported some day."

"No, no; not me, Mr. Tom," said Bob, with an air of cheerful
confidence. "There's no law again' flea-bites. If I wasn't to take a
fool in now and then, he'd niver get any wiser. But, lors! hev a
suvreign to buy you and Miss summat, on'y for a token--just to match
my pocket-knife."

While Bob was speaking he laid down the sovereign, and resolutely
twisted up his bag again. Tom pushed back the gold, and said, "No,
indeed, Bob; thank you heartily, but I can't take it." And Maggie,
taking it between her fingers, held it up to Bob and said, more
persuasively:

"Not now, but perhaps another time. If ever Tom or my father wants
help that you can give, we'll let you know; won't we, Tom? That's what
you would like,--to have us always depend on you as a friend that we
can go to,--isn't it, Bob?"

"Yes, Miss, and thank you," said Bob, reluctantly taking the money;
"that's what I'd like, anything as you like. An' I wish you good-by,
Miss, and good-luck, Mr. Tom, and thank you for shaking hands wi' me,
_though_ you wouldn't take the money."

Kezia's entrance, with very black looks, to inquire if she shouldn't
bring in the tea now, or whether the toast was to get hardened to a
brick, was a seasonable check on Bob's flux of words, and hastened his
parting bow.



Chapter VII

How a Hen Takes to Stratagem


The days passed, and Mr. Tulliver showed, at least to the eyes of the
medical man, stronger and stronger symptoms of a gradual return to his
normal condition; the paralytic obstruction was, little by little,
losing its tenacity, and the mind was rising from under it with fitful
struggles, like a living creature making its way from under a great
snowdrift, that slides and slides again, and shuts up the newly made
opening.

Time would have seemed to creep to the watchers by the bed, if it had
only been measured by the doubtful, distant hope which kept count of
the moments within the chamber; but it was measured for them by a
fast-approaching dread which made the nights come too quickly. While
Mr. Tulliver was slowly becoming himself again, his lot was hastening
toward its moment of most palpable change. The taxing-masters had done
their work like any respectable gunsmith conscientiously preparing the
musket, that, duly pointed by a brave arm, will spoil a life or two.
Allocaturs, filing of bills in Chancery, decrees of sale, are legal
chain-shot or bomb-shells that can never hit a solitary mark, but must
fall with widespread shattering. So deeply inherent is it in this life
of ours that men have to suffer for each other's sins, so inevitably
diffusive is human suffering, that even justice makes its victims, and
we can conceive no retribution that does not spread beyond its mark in
pulsations of unmerited pain.

By the beginning of the second week in January, the bills were out
advertising the sale, under a decree of Chancery, of Mr. Tulliver's
farming and other stock, to be followed by a sale of the mill and
land, held in the proper after-dinner hour at the Golden Lion. The
miller himself, unaware of the lapse of time, fancied himself still in
that first stage of his misfortunes when expedients might be thought
of; and often in his conscious hours talked in a feeble, disjointed
manner of plans he would carry out when he "got well." The wife and
children were not without hope of an issue that would at least save
Mr. Tulliver from leaving the old spot, and seeking an entirely
strange life. For uncle Deane had been induced to interest himself in
this stage of the business. It would not, he acknowledged, be a bad
speculation for Guest & Co. to buy Dorlcote Mill, and carry on the
business, which was a good one, and might be increased by the addition
of steam power; in which case Tulliver might be retained as manager.
Still, Mr. Deane would say nothing decided about the matter; the fact
that Wakem held the mortgage on the land might put it into his head to
bid for the whole estate, and further, to outbid the cautious firm of
Guest &Co., who did not carry on business on sentimental grounds. Mr.
Deane was obliged to tell Mrs. Tulliver something to that effect, when
he rode over to the mill to inspect the books in company with Mrs.
Glegg; for she had observed that "if Guest &Co. would only think about
it, Mr. Tulliver's father and grandfather had been carrying on
Dorlcote Mill long before the oil-mill of that firm had been so much
as thought of."

Mr. Deane, in reply, doubted whether that was precisely the relation
between the two mills which would determine their value as
investments. As for uncle Glegg, the thing lay quite beyond his
imagination; the good-natured man felt sincere pity for the Tulliver
family, but his money was all locked up in excellent mortgages, and he
