could run no risk; that would be unfair to his own relatives; but he
had made up his mind that Tulliver should have some new flannel
waistcoats which he had himself renounced in favor of a more elastic
commodity, and that he would buy Mrs. Tulliver a pound of tea now and
then; it would be a journey which his benevolence delighted in
beforehand, to carry the tea and see her pleasure on being assured it
was the best black.

Still, it was clear that Mr. Deane was kindly disposed toward the
Tullivers. One day he had brought Lucy, who was come home for the
Christmas holidays, and the little blond angel-head had pressed itself
against Maggie's darker cheek with many kisses and some tears. These
fair slim daughters keep up a tender spot in the heart of many a
respectable partner in a respectable firm, and perhaps Lucy's anxious,
pitying questions about her poor cousins helped to make uncle Deane
more prompt in finding Tom a temporary place in the warehouse, and in
putting him in the way of getting evening lessons in book-keeping and
calculation.

That might have cheered the lad and fed his hopes a little, if there
had not come at the same time the much-dreaded blow of finding that
his father must be a bankrupt, after all; at least, the creditors must
be asked to take less than their due, which to Tom's untechnical mind
was the same thing as bankruptcy. His father must not only be said to
have "lost his property," but to have "failed,"--the word that carried
the worst obloquy to Tom's mind. For when the defendant's claim for
costs had been satisfied, there would remain the friendly bill of Mr.
Gore, and the deficiency at the bank, as well as the other debts which
would make the assets shrink into unequivocal disproportion; "not more
than ten or twelve shillings in the pound," predicted Mr. Deane, in a
decided tone, tightening his lips; and the words fell on Tom like a
scalding liquied, leaving a continual smart.

He was sadly in want of something to keep up his spirits a little in
the unpleasant newness of his position,--suddenly transported from the
easy carpeted _ennui_ of study-hours at Mr. Stelling's, and the busy
idleness of castle-building in a "last half" at school, to the
companionship of sacks and hides, and bawling men thundering down
heavy weights at his elbow. The first step toward getting on in the
world was a chill, dusty, noisy affair, and implied going without
one's tea in order to stay in St. Ogg's and have an evening lesson
from a one-armed elderly clerk, in a room smelling strongly of bad
tobacco. Tom's young pink-and-white face had its colors very much
deadened by the time he took off his hat at home, and sat down with
keen hunger to his supper. No wonder he was a little cross if his
mother or Maggie spoke to him.

But all this while Mrs. Tulliver was brooding over a scheme by which
she, and no one else, would avert the result most to be dreaded, and
prevent Wakem from entertaining the purpose of bidding for the mill.
Imagine a truly respectable and amiable hen, by some portentous
anomaly, taking to reflection and inventing combinations by which she
might prevail on Hodge not to wring her neck, or send her and her
chicks to market; the result could hardly be other than much cackling
and fluttering. Mrs. Tulliver, seeing that everything had gone wrong,
had begun to think she had been too passive in life; and that, if she
had applied her mind to business, and taken a strong resolution now
and then, it would have been all the better for her and her family.
Nobody, it appeared, had thought of going to speak to Wakem on this
business of the mill; and yet, Mrs. Tulliver reflected, it would have
been quite the shortest method of securing the right end. It would
have been of no use, to be sure, for Mr. Tulliver to go,--even if he
had been able and willing,--for he had been "going to law against
Wakem" and abusing him for the last ten years; Wakem was always likely
to have a spite against him. And now that Mrs. Tulliver had come to
the conclusion that her husband was very much in the wrong to bring
her into this trouble, she was inclined to think that his opinion of
Wakem was wrong too. To be sure, Wakem had "put the bailies in the
house, and sold them up"; but she supposed he did that to please the
man that lent Mr. Tulliver the money, for a lawyer had more folks to
please than one, and he wasn't likely to put Mr. Tulliver, who had
gone to law with him, above everybody else in the world. The attorney
might be a very reasonable man; why not? He had married a Miss Clint,
and at the time Mrs. Tulliver had heard of that marriage, the summer
when she wore her blue satin spencer, and had not yet any thoughts of
Mr. Tulliver, she knew no harm of Wakem. And certainly toward herself,
whom he knew to have been a Miss Dodson, it was out of all possibility
that he could entertain anything but good-will, when it was once
brought home to his observation that she, for her part, had never
wanted to go to law, and indeed was at present disposed to take Mr.
Wakem's view of all subjects rather than her husband's. In fact, if
that attorney saw a respectable matron like herself disposed "to give
him good words," why shouldn't he listen to her representations? For
she would put the matter clearly before him, which had never been done
yet. And he would never go and bid for the mill on purpose to spite
her, an innocent woman, who thought it likely enough that she had
danced with him in their youth at Squire Darleigh's, for at those big
dances she had often and often danced with young men whose names she
had forgotten.

Mrs. Tulliver hid these reasonings in her own bosom; for when she had
thrown out a hint to Mr. Deane and Mr. Glegg that she wouldn't mind
going to speak to Wakem herself, they had said, "No, no, no," and
"Pooh, pooh," and "Let Wakem alone," in the tone of men who were not
likely to give a candid attention to a more definite exposition of her
project; still less dared she mention the plan to Tom and Maggie, for
"the children were always so against everything their mother said";
and Tom, she observed, was almost as much set against Wakem as his
father was. But this unusual concentration of thought naturally gave
Mrs. Tulliver an unusual power of device and determination: and a day
or two before the sale, to be held at the Golden Lion, when there was
no longer any time to be lost, she carried out her plan by a
stratagem. There were pickles in question, a large stock of pickles
and ketchup which Mrs. Tulliver possessed, and which Mr. Hyndmarsh,
the grocer, would certainly purchase if she could transact the
business in a personal interview, so she would walk with Tom to St.
Ogg's that morning; and when Tom urged that she might let the pickles
be at present,--he didn't like her to go about just yet,--she appeared
so hurt at this conduct in her son, contradicting her about pickles
which she had made after the family receipts inherited from his own
grandmother, who had died when his mother was a little girl, that he
gave way, and they walked together until she turned toward Danish
Street, where Mr. Hyndmarsh retailed his grocery, not far from the
offices of Mr. Wakem.

That gentleman was not yet come to his office; would Mrs. Tulliver sit
down by the fire in his private room and wait for him? She had not
long to wait before the punctual attorney entered, knitting his brow
with an examining glance at the stout blond woman who rose, curtsying
deferentially,--a tallish man, with an aquiline nose and abundant
iron-gray hair. You have never seen Mr. Wakem before, and are possibly
wondering whether he was really as eminent a rascal, and as crafty,
bitter an enemy of honest humanity in general, and of Mr. Tulliver in
particular, as he is represented to be in that eidolon or portrait of
him which we have seen to exist in the miller's mind.

It is clear that the irascible miller was a man to interpret any
chance-shot that grazed him as an attempt on his own life, and was
liable to entanglements in this puzzling world, which, due
consideration had to his own infallibility, required the hypothesis of
a very active diabolical agency to explain them. It is still possible
to believe that the attorney was not more guilty toward him than an
ingenious machine, which performs its work with much regularity, is
guilty toward the rash man who, venturing too near it, is caught up by
some fly-wheel or other, and suddenly converted into unexpected
mince-meat.

But it is really impossible to decide this question by a glance at his
person; the lines and lights of the human countenance are like other
symbols,--not always easy to read without a key. On an _a priori_ view
of Wakem's aquiline nose, which offended Mr. Tulliver, there was not
more rascality than in the shape of his stiff shirt-collar, though
this too along with his nose, might have become fraught with damnatory
meaning when once the rascality was ascertained.

"Mrs. Tulliver, I think?" said Mr. Wakem.

"Yes, sir; Miss Elizabeth Dodson as was."

"Pray be seated. You have some business with me?"

"Well, sir, yes," said Mrs. Tulliver, beginning to feel alarmed at her
own courage, now she was really in presence of the formidable man, and
reflecting that she had not settled with herself how she should begin.
Mr. Wakem felt in his waistcoat pockets, and looked at her in silence.

"I hope, sir," she began at last,--"I hope, sir, you're not a-thinking
as _I_ bear you any ill-will because o' my husband's losing his
lawsuit, and the bailies being put in, and the linen being sold,--oh
dear!--for I wasn't brought up in that way. I'm sure you remember my
father, sir, for he was close friends with Squire Darleigh, and we
allays went to the dances there, the Miss Dodsons,--nobody could be
more looked on,--and justly, for there was four of us, and you're
quite aware as Mrs. Glegg and Mrs. Deane are my sisters. And as for
going to law and losing money, and having sales before you're dead, I
never saw anything o' that before I was married, nor for a long while
after. And I'm not to be answerable for my bad luck i' marrying out o'
my own family into one where the goings-on was different. And as for
being drawn in t' abuse you as other folks abuse you, sir, _that_ I
niver was, and nobody can say it of me."

Mrs. Tulliver shook her head a little, and looked at the hem of her
pocket-handkerchief.

"I've no doubt of what you say, Mrs. Tulliver," said Mr. Wakem, with
cold politeness. "But you have some question to ask me?"

"Well, sir, yes. But that's what I've said to myself,--I've said you'd
had some nat'ral feeling; and as for my husband, as hasn't been
himself for this two months, I'm not a-defending him, in no way, for
being so hot about th' erigation,--not but what there's worse men, for
he never wronged nobody of a shilling nor a penny, not willingly; and
as for his fieriness and lawing, what could I do? And him struck as if
it was with death when he got the letter as said you'd the hold upo'
the land. But I can't believe but what you'll behave as a gentleman."

"What does all this mean, Mrs. Tulliver?" said Mr. Wakem rather
sharply. "What do you want to ask me?"

"Why, sir, if you'll be so good," said Mrs. Tulliver, starting a
little, and speaking more hurriedly,--"if you'll be so good not to buy
the mill an' the land,--the land wouldn't so much matter, only my
husband ull' be like mad at your having it."

Something like a new thought flashed across Mr. Wakem's face as he
said, "Who told you I meant to buy it?"

"Why, sir, it's none o' my inventing, and I should never ha' thought
of it; for my husband, as ought to know about the law, he allays used
to say as lawyers had never no call to buy anything,--either lands or
houses,--for they allays got 'em into their hands other ways. An' I
should think that 'ud be the way with you, sir; and I niver said as
you'd be the man to do contrairy to that."

"Ah, well, who was it that _did_ say so?" said Wakem, opening his
desk, and moving things about, with the accompaniment of an almost
inaudible whistle.

"Why, sir, it was Mr. Glegg and Mr. Deane, as have all the management;
and Mr. Deane thinks as Guest &Co. 'ud buy the mill and let Mr.
Tulliver work it for 'em, if you didn't bid for it and raise the
price. And it 'ud be such a thing for my husband to stay where he is,
if he could get his living: for it was his father's before him, the
mill was, and his grandfather built it, though I wasn't fond o' the
noise of it, when first I was married, for there was no mills in our
family,--not the Dodson's,--and if I'd known as the mills had so much
to do with the law, it wouldn't have been me as 'ud have been the
first Dodson to marry one; but I went into it blindfold, that I did,
erigation and everything."

"What! Guest &Co. would keep the mill in their own hands, I suppose,
and pay your husband wages?"

"Oh dear, sir, it's hard to think of," said poor Mrs. Tulliver, a
little tear making its way, "as my husband should take wage. But it
'ud look more like what used to be, to stay at the mill than to go
anywhere else; and if you'll only think--if you was to bid for the
mill and buy it, my husband might be struck worse than he was before,
and niver get better again as he's getting now."

"Well, but if I bought the mill, and allowed your husband to act as my
manager in the same way, how then?" said Mr. Wakem.

"Oh, sir, I doubt he could niver be got to do it, not if the very mill
stood still to beg and pray of him. For your name's like poison to
him, it's so as never was; and he looks upon it as you've been the
ruin of him all along, ever since you set the law on him about the
road through the meadow,--that's eight year ago, and he's been going
on ever since--as I've allays told him he was wrong----"

"He's a pig-headed, foul-mouthed fool!" burst out Mr. Wakem,
forgetting himself.

"Oh dear, sir!" said Mrs. Tulliver, frightened at a result so
different from the one she had fixed her mind on; "I wouldn't wish to
contradict you, but it's like enough he's changed his mind with this
illness,--he's forgot a many things he used to talk about. And you
wouldn't like to have a corpse on your mind, if he was to die; and
they _do_ say as it's allays unlucky when Dorlcote Mill changes hands,
and the water might all run away, and _then_--not as I'm wishing you
any ill-luck, sir, for I forgot to tell you as I remember your wedding
as if it was yesterday; Mrs. Wakem was a Miss Clint, I know _that;_
and my boy, as there isn't a nicer, handsomer, straighter boy nowhere,
went to school with your son----"

Mr. Wakem rose, opened the door, and called to one of his clerks.

"You must excuse me for interrupting you, Mrs. Tulliver; I have
business that must be attended to; and I think there is nothing more
necessary to be said."

"But if you _would_ bear it in mind, sir," said Mrs. Tulliver, rising,
"and not run against me and my children; and I'm not denying Mr.
Tulliver's been in the wrong, but he's been punished enough, and
there's worse men, for it's been giving to other folks has been his
fault. He's done nobody any harm but himself and his family,--the
more's the pity,--and I go and look at the bare shelves every day, and
think where all my things used to stand."

"Yes, yes, I'll bear it in mind," said Mr. Wakem, hastily, looking
toward the open door.

"And if you'd please not to say as I've been to speak to you, for my
son 'ud be very angry with me for demeaning myself, I know he would,
and I've trouble enough without being scolded by my children."

Poor Mrs. Tulliver's voice trembled a little, and she could make no
answer to the attorney's "good morning," but curtsied and walked out
in silence.

"Which day is it that Dorlcote Mill is to be sold? Where's the bill?"
said Mr. Wakem to his clerk when they were alone.

"Next Friday is the day,--Friday at six o'clock."

"Oh, just run to Winship's the auctioneer, and see if he's at home. I
have some business for him; ask him to come up."

Although, when Mr. Wakem entered his office that morning, he had had
no intention of purchasing Dorlcote Mill, his mind was already made
up. Mrs. Tulliver had suggested to him several determining motives,
and his mental glance was very rapid; he was one of those men who can
be prompt without being rash, because their motives run in fixed
tracks, and they have no need to reconcile conflicting aims.

To suppose that Wakem had the same sort of inveterate hatred toward
Tulliver that Tulliver had toward him would be like supposing that a
pike and a roach can look at each other from a similar point of view.
The roach necessarily abhors the mode in which the pike gets his
living, and the pike is likely to think nothing further even of the
most indignant roach than that he is excellent good eating; it could
only be when the roach choked him that the pike could entertain a
strong personal animosity. If Mr. Tulliver had ever seriously injured
or thwarted the attorney, Wakem would not have refused him the
distinction of being a special object of his vindictiveness. But when
Mr. Tulliver called Wakem a rascal at the market dinner-table, the
attorneys' clients were not a whit inclined to withdraw their business
from him; and if, when Wakem himself happened to be present, some
jocose cattle-feeder, stimulated by opportunity and brandy, made a
thrust at him by alluding to old ladies' wills, he maintained perfect
_sang froid_, and knew quite well that the majority of substantial men
then present were perfectly contented with the fact that "Wakem was
Wakem"; that is to say, a man who always knew the stepping-stones that
would carry him through very muddy bits of practice. A man who had
made a large fortune, had a handsome house among the trees at Tofton,
and decidedly the finest stock of port-wine in the neighborhood of St.
Ogg's, was likely to feel himself on a level with public opinion. And
I am not sure that even honest Mr. Tulliver himself, with his general
view of law as a cockpit, might not, under opposite circumstances,
have seen a fine appropriateness in the truth that "Wakem was Wakem";
since I have understood from persons versed in history, that mankind
is not disposed to look narrowly into the conduct of great victors
when their victory is on the right side. Tulliver, then, could be no
obstruction to Wakem; on the contrary, he was a poor devil whom the
lawyer had defeated several times; a hot-tempered fellow, who would
always give you a handle against him. Wakem's conscience was not
uneasy because he had used a few tricks against the miller; why should
he hate that unsuccessful plaintiff, that pitiable, furious bull
entangled in the meshes of a net?

Still, among the various excesses to which human nature is subject,
moralists have never numbered that of being too fond of the people who
openly revile us. The successful Yellow candidate for the borough of
Old Topping, perhaps, feels no pursuant meditative hatred toward the
Blue editor who consoles his subscribers with vituperative rhetoric
against Yellow men who sell their country, and are the demons of
private life; but he might not be sorry, if law and opportunity
favored, to kick that Blue editor to a deeper shade of his favorite
color. Prosperous men take a little vengeance now and then, as they
take a diversion, when it comes easily in their way, and is no
hindrance to business; and such small unimpassioned revenges have an
enormous effect in life, running through all degrees of pleasant
infliction, blocking the fit men out of places, and blackening
characters in unpremeditated talk. Still more, to see people who have
been only insignificantly offensive to us reduced in life and
humiliated, without any special effort of ours, is apt to have a
soothing, flattering influence. Providence or some other prince of
this world, it appears, has undertaken the task of retribution for us;
and really, by an agreeable constitution of things, our enemies
somehow _don't_ prosper.

Wakem was not without this parenthetic vindictiveness toward the
uncomplimentary miller; and now Mrs. Tulliver had put the notion into
his head, it presented itself to him as a pleasure to do the very
thing that would cause Mr. Tulliver the most deadly mortification,--
and a pleasure of a complex kind, not made up of crude malice, but
mingling with it the relish of self-approbation. To see an enemy
humiliated gives a certain contentment, but this is jejune compared
with the highly blent satisfaction of seeing him humiliated by your
benevolent action or concession on his behalf. That is a sort of
revenge which falls into the scale of virtue, and Wakem was not without
an intention of keeping that scale respectably filled. He had once
had the pleasure of putting an old enemy of his into one of the St.
Ogg's alms-houses, to the rebuilding of which he had given a large
subscription; and here was an opportunity of providing for another by
making him his own servant. Such things give a completeness to
prosperity, and contribute elements of agreeable consciousness that
are not dreamed of by that short-sighted, overheated vindictiveness
which goes out its way to wreak itself in direct injury. And Tulliver,
with his rough tongue filed by a sense of obligation, would make a
better servant than any chance-fellow who was cap-in-hand for a
situation. Tulliver was known to be a man of proud honesty, and Wakem
was too acute not to believe in the existence of honesty. He was given
too observing individuals, not to judging of them according to maxims,
and no one knew better than he that all men were not like himself.
Besides, he intended to overlook the whole business of land and mill
pretty closely; he was fond of these practical rural matters. But
there were good reasons for purchasing Dorlcote Mill, quite apart from
any benevolent vengeance on the miller. It was really a capital
investment; besides, Guest &Co. were going to bid for it. Mr. Guest
and Mr. Wakem were on friendly dining terms, and the attorney liked to
predominate over a ship-owner and mill-owner who was a little too loud
in the town affairs as well as in his table-talk. For Wakem was not a
mere man of business; he was considered a pleasant fellow in the upper
circles of St. Ogg's--chatted amusingly over his port-wine, did a
little amateur farming, and had certainly been an excellent husband
and father; at church, when he went there, he sat under the handsomest
of mural monuments erected to the memory of his wife. Most men would
have married again under his circumstances, but he was said to be more
tender to his deformed son than most men were to their best-shapen
offspring. Not that Mr. Wakem had not other sons beside Philip; but
toward them he held only a chiaroscuro parentage, and provided for
them in a grade of life duly beneath his own. In this fact, indeed,
there lay the clenching motive to the purchase of Dorlcote Mill. While
Mrs. Tulliver was talking, it had occurred to the rapid-minded lawyer,
among all the other circumstances of the case, that this purchase
would, in a few years to come, furnish a highly suitable position for
a certain favorite lad whom he meant to bring on in the world.

These were the mental conditions on which Mrs. Tulliver had undertaken
to act persuasively, and had failed; a fact which may receive some
illustration from the remark of a great philosopher, that fly-fishers
fail in preparing their bait so as to make it alluring in the right
quarter, for want of a due acquaintance with the subjectivity of
fishes.



Chapter VIII

Daylight on the Wreck


It was a clear frosty January day on which Mr. Tulliver first came
downstairs. The bright sun on the chestnut boughs and the roofs
opposite his window had made him impatiently declare that he would be
caged up no longer; he thought everywhere would be more cheery under
this sunshine than his bedroom; for he knew nothing of the bareness
below, which made the flood of sunshine importunate, as if it had an
unfeeling pleasure in showing the empty places, and the marks where
well-known objects once had been. The impression on his mind that it
was but yesterday when he received the letter from Mr. Gore was so
continually implied in his talk, and the attempts to convey to him the
idea that many weeks had passed and much had happened since then had
been so soon swept away by recurrent forgetfulness, that even Mr.
Turnbull had begun to despair of preparing him to meet the facts by
previous knowledge. The full sense of the present could only be
imparted gradually by new experience,--not by mere words, which must
remain weaker than the impressions left by the _old_ experience. This
resolution to come downstairs was heard with trembling by the wife and
children. Mrs. Tulliver said Tom must not go to St. Ogg's at the usual
hour, he must wait and see his father downstairs; and Tom complied,
though with an intense inward shrinking from the painful scene. The
hearts of all three had been more deeply dejected than ever during the
last few days. For Guest & Co. had not bought the mill; both mill and
land had been knocked down to Wakem, who had been over the premises,
and had laid before Mr. Deane and Mr. Glegg, in Mrs. Tulliver's
presence, his willingness to employ Mr. Tulliver, in case of his
recovery, as a manager of the business. This proposition had
occasioned much family debating. Uncles and aunts were almost
unanimously of opinion that such an offer ought not to be rejected
when there was nothing in the way but a feeling in Mr. Tulliver's
mind, which, as neither aunts nor uncles shared it, was regarded as
entirely unreasonable and childish,--indeed, as a transferring toward
Wakem of that indignation and hatred which Mr. Tulliver ought properly
to have directed against himself for his general quarrelsomeness, and
his special exhibition of it in going to law. Here was an opportunity
for Mr. Tulliver to provide for his wife and daughter without any
assistance from his wife's relations, and without that too evident
descent into pauperism which makes it annoying to respectable people
to meet the degraded member of the family by the wayside. Mr.
Tulliver, Mrs. Glegg considered, must be made to feel, when he came to
his right mind, that he could never humble himself enough; for _that_
had come which she had always foreseen would come of his insolence in
time past "to them as were the best friends he'd got to look to." Mr
Glegg and Mr. Deane were less stern in their views, but they both of
them thought Tulliver had done enough harm by his hot-tempered
crotchets and ought to put them out of the question when a livelihood
was offered him; Wakem showed a right feeling about the matter,--_he_
had no grudge against Tulliver.

Tom had protested against entertaining the proposition. He shouldn't
like his father to be under Wakem; he thought it would look
mean-spirited; but his mother's main distress was the utter
impossibility of ever "turning Mr. Tulliver round about Wakem," or
getting him to hear reason; no, they would all have to go and live in
a pigsty on purpose to spite Wakem, who spoke "so as nobody could be
fairer." Indeed, Mrs. Tulliver's mind was reduced to such confusion by
living in this strange medium of unaccountable sorrow, against which
she continually appealed by asking, "Oh dear, what _have_ I done to
deserve worse than other women?" that Maggie began to suspect her poor
mother's wits were quite going.

"Tom," she said, when they were out of their father's room together,
"we _must_ try to make father understand a little of what has happened
before he goes downstairs. But we must get my mother away. She will
say something that will do harm. Ask Kezia to fetch her down, and keep
her engaged with something in the kitchen."

Kezia was equal to the task. Having declared her intention of staying
till the master could get about again, "wage or no wage," she had
found a certain recompense in keeping a strong hand over her mistress,
scolding her for "moithering" herself, and going about all day without
changing her cap, and looking as if she was "mushed." Altogether, this
time of trouble was rather a Saturnalian time to Kezia; she could
scold her betters with unreproved freedom. On this particular occasion
there were drying clothes to be fetched in; she wished to know if one
pair of hands could do everything in-doors and out, and observed that
_she_ should have thought it would be good for Mrs. Tulliver to put on
her bonnet, and get a breath of fresh air by doing that needful piece
of work. Poor Mrs. Tulliver went submissively downstairs; to be
ordered about by a servant was the last remnant of her household
dignities,--she would soon have no servant to scold her. Mr. Tulliver
was resting in his chair a little after the fatigue of dressing, and
Maggie and Tom were seated near him, when Luke entered to ask if he
should help master downstairs.

"Ay, ay, Luke; stop a bit, sit down," said Mr. Tulliver pointing his
stick toward a chair, and looking at him with that pursuant gaze which
convalescent persons often have for those who have tended them,
reminding one of an infant gazing about after its nurse. For Luke had
been a constant night-watcher by his master's bed.

"How's the water now, eh, Luke?" said Mr. Tulliver. "Dix hasn't been
choking you up again, eh?"

"No, sir, it's all right."

"Ay, I thought not; he won't be in a hurry at that again, now Riley's
been to settle him. That was what I said to Riley yesterday--I
said----"

Mr. Tulliver leaned forward, resting his elbows on the armchair, and
looking on the ground as if in search of something, striving after
vanishing images like a man struggling against a doze. Maggie looked
at Tom in mute distress, their father's mind was so far off the
present, which would by-and-by thrust itself on his wandering
consciousness! Tom was almost ready to rush away, with that impatience
of painful emotion which makes one of the differences between youth
and maiden, man and woman.

"Father," said Maggie, laying her hand on his, "don't you remember
that Mr. Riley is dead?"

"Dead?" said Mr. Tulliver, sharply, looking in her face with a
strange, examining glance.

"Yes, he died of apoplexy nearly a year ago. I remember hearing you
say you had to pay money for him; and he left his daughters badly off;
one of them is under-teacher at Miss Firniss's, where I've been to
school, you know."

"Ah?" said her father, doubtfully, still looking in her face. But as
soon as Tom began to speak he turned to look at _him_ with the same
inquiring glances, as if he were rather surprised at the presence of
these two young people. Whenever his mind was wandering in the far
past, he fell into this oblivion of their actual faces; they were not
those of the lad and the little wench who belonged to that past.

"It's a long while since you had the dispute with Dix, father," said
Tom. "I remember your talking about it three years ago, before I went
to school at Mr. Stelling's. I've been at school there three years;
don't you remember?"

Mr. Tulliver threw himself backward again, losing the childlike
outward glance under a rush of new ideas, which diverted him from
external impressions.

"Ay, ay," he said, after a minute or two, "I've paid a deal o'
money--I was determined my son should have a good eddication; I'd none
myself, and I've felt the miss of it. And he'll want no other fortin,
that's what I say--if Wakem was to get the better of me again----"

The thought of Wakem roused new vibrations, and after a moment's pause
he began to look at the coat he had on, and to feel in his
side-pocket. Then he turned to Tom, and said in his old sharp way,
"Where have they put Gore's letter?"

It was close at hand in a drawer, for he had often asked for it
before.

"You know what there is in the letter, father?" said Tom, as he gave
it to him.

"To be sure I do," said Mr. Tulliver, rather angrily. "What o' that?
If Furley can't take to the property, somebody else can; there's
plenty o' people in the world besides Furley. But it's hindering--my
not being well--go and tell 'em to get the horse in the gig, Luke; I
can get down to St. Ogg's well enough--Gore's expecting me."

"No, dear father!" Maggie burst out entreatingly; "it's a very long
while since all that; you've been ill a great many weeks,--more than
two months; everything is changed."

Mr. Tulliver looked at them all three alternately with a startled
gaze; the idea that much had happened of which he knew nothing had
often transiently arrested him before, but it came upon him now with
entire novelty.

"Yes, father," said Tom, in answer to the gaze. "You needn't trouble
your mind about business until you are quite well; everything is
settled about that for the present,--about the mill and the land and
the debts."

"What's settled, then?" said his father, angrily.

"Don't you take on too much bout it, sir," said Luke. "You'd ha' paid
iverybody if you could,--that's what I said to Master Tom,--I said
you'd ha' paid iverybody if you could."

Good Luke felt, after the manner of contented hard-working men whose
lives have been spent in servitude, that sense of natural fitness in
rank which made his master's downfall a tragedy to him. He was urged,
in his slow way, to say something that would express his share in the
family sorrow; and these words, which he had used over and over again
to Tom when he wanted to decline the full payment of his fifty pounds
out of the children's money, were the most ready to his tongue. They
were just the words to lay the most painful hold on his master's
bewildered mind.

"Paid everybody?" he said, with vehement agitation, his face flushing,
and his eye lighting up. "Why--what--have they made me a _bankrupt?_"

"Oh, father, dear father!" said Maggie, who thought that terrible word
really represented the fact; "bear it well, because we love you; your
children will always love you. Tom will pay them all; he says he will,
when he's a man."

She felt her father beginning to tremble; his voice trembled too, as
he said, after a few moments:

"Ay, my little wench, but I shall never live twice o'er."

"But perhaps you will live to see me pay everybody, father," said Tom,
speaking with a great effort.

"Ah, my lad," said Mr. Tulliver, shaking his head slowly, "but what's
broke can never be whole again; it 'ud be your doing, not mine." Then
looking up at him, "You're only sixteen; it's an up-hill fight for
you, but you mustn't throw it at your father; the raskills have been
too many for him. I've given you a good eddication,--that'll start
you."

Something in his throat half choked the last words; the flush, which
had alarmed his children because it had so often preceded a recurrence
of paralysis, had subsided, and his face looked pale and tremulous.
Tom said nothing; he was still struggling against his inclination to
rush away. His father remained quiet a minute or two, but his mind did
not seem to be wandering again.

"Have they sold me up, then?" he said more calmly, as if he were
possessed simply by the desire to know what had happened.

"Everything is sold, father; but we don't know all about the mill and
the land yet," said Tom, anxious to ward off any question leading to
the fact that Wakem was the purchaser.

"You must not be surprised to see the room look very bare downstairs,
father," said Maggie; "but there's your chair and the bureau;
_they're_ not gone."

"Let us go; help me down, Luke,--I'll go and see everything," said Mr.
Tulliver, leaning on his stick, and stretching out his other hand
toward Luke.

"Ay, sir," said Luke, as he gave his arm to his master, "you'll make
up your mind to't a bit better when you've seen iverything; you'll get
used to't. That's what my mother says about her shortness o'
breath,--she says she's made friends wi't now, though she fought
again' it sore when it just come on."

Maggie ran on before to see that all was right in the dreary parlor,
where the fire, dulled by the frosty sunshine, seemed part of the
general shabbiness. She turned her father's chair, and pushed aside
the table to make an easy way for him, and then stood with a beating
heart to see him enter and look round for the first time. Tom advanced
before him, carrying the leg-rest, and stood beside Maggie on the
hearth. Of those two young hearts Tom's suffered the most unmixed
pain, for Maggie, with all her keen susceptibility, yet felt as if the
sorrow made larger room for her love to flow in, and gave
breathing-space to her passionate nature. No true boy feels that; he
would rather go and slay the Nemean lion, or perform any round of
heroic labors, than endure perpetual appeals to his pity, for evils
over which he can make no conquest.

Mr. Tulliver paused just inside the door, resting on Luke, and looking
round him at all the bare places, which for him were filled with the
shadows of departed objects,--the daily companions of his life. His
faculties seemed to be renewing their strength from getting a footing
on this demonstration of the senses.

"Ah!" he said slowly, moving toward his chair, "they've sold me
up--they've sold me up."

Then seating himself, and laying down his stick, while Luke left the
room, he looked round again.

"They've left the big Bible," he said. "It's got everything in,--when
I was born and married; bring it me, Tom."

The quarto Bible was laid open before him at the fly-leaf, and while
he was reading with slowly travelling eyes Mrs. Tulliver entered the
room, but stood in mute surprise to find her husband down already, and
with the great Bible before him.

"Ah," he said, looking at a spot where his finger rested, "my mother
was Margaret Beaton; she died when she was forty-seven,--hers wasn't a
long-lived family; we're our mother's children, Gritty and me are,--we
shall go to our last bed before long."

He seemed to be pausing over the record of his sister's birth and
marriage, as if it were suggesting new thoughts to him; then he
suddenly looked up at Tom, and said, in a sharp tone of alarm:

"They haven't come upo' Moss for the money as I lent him, have they?"

"No, father," said Tom; "the note was burnt."

Mr. Tulliver turned his eyes on the page again, and presently said:

"Ah--Elizabeth Dodson--it's eighteen year since I married her----"

"Come next Ladyday," said Mrs. Tulliver, going up to his side and
looking at the page.

Her husband fixed his eyes earnestly on her face.

"Poor Bessy," he said, "you was a pretty lass then,--everybody said
so,--and I used to think you kept your good looks rarely. But you're
sorely aged; don't you bear me ill-will--I meant to do well by you--we
promised one another for better or for worse----"

"But I never thought it 'ud be so for worse as this," said poor Mrs.
Tulliver, with the strange, scared look that had come over her of
late; "and my poor father gave me away--and to come on so all at
once----"

"Oh, mother!" said Maggie, "don't talk in that way."

"No, I know you won't let your poor mother speak--that's been the way
all my life--your father never minded what I said--it 'ud have been o'
no use for me to beg and pray--and it 'ud be no use now, not if I was
to go down o' my hands and knees----"

"Don't say so, Bessy," said Mr. Tulliver, whose pride, in these first
moments of humiliation, was in abeyance to the sense of some justice
in his wife's reproach. "It there's anything left as I could do to
make you amends, I wouldn't say you nay."

"Then we might stay here and get a living, and I might keep among my
own sisters,--and me been such a good wife to you, and never crossed
you from week's end to week's end--and they all say so--they say it
'ud be nothing but right, only you're so turned against Wakem."

"Mother," said Tom, severely, "this is not the time to talk about
that."

"Let her be," said Mr. Tulliver. "Say what you mean, Bessy."

"Why, now the mill and the land's all Wakem's, and he's got everything
in his hands, what's the use o' setting your face against him, when he
says you may stay here, and speaks as fair as can be, and says you may
manage the business, and have thirty shillings a-week, and a horse to
ride about to market? And where have we got to put our heads? We must
go into one o' the cottages in the village,--and me and my children
brought down to that,--and all because you must set your mind against
folks till there's no turning you."

Mr. Tulliver had sunk back in his chair trembling.

"You may do as you like wi' me, Bessy," he said, in a low voice; "I've
been the bringing of you to poverty--this world's too many for me--I'm
nought but a bankrupt; it's no use standing up for anything now."

"Father," said Tom, "I don't agree with my mother or my uncles, and I
don't think you ought to submit to be under Wakem. I get a pound
a-week now, and you can find something else to do when you get well."

"Say no more, Tom, say no more; I've had enough for this day. Give me
a kiss, Bessy, and let us bear one another no ill-will; we shall never
be young again--this world's been too many for me."



Chapter IX

An Item Added to the Family Register


That first moment of renunciation and submission was followed by days
of violent struggle in the miller's mind, as the gradual access of
bodily strength brought with it increasing ability to embrace in one
view all the conflicting conditions under which he found himself.
Feeble limbs easily resign themselves to be tethered, and when we are
subdued by sickness it seems possible to us to fulfil pledges which
the old vigor comes back and breaks. There were times when poor
Tulliver thought the fulfilment of his promise to Bessy was something
quite too hard for human nature; he had promised her without knowing
what she was going to say,--she might as well have asked him to carry
a ton weight on his back. But again, there were many feelings arguing
on her side, besides the sense that life had been made hard to her by
having married him. He saw a possibility, by much pinching, of saving
money out of his salary toward paying a second dividend to his
creditors, and it would not be easy elsewhere to get a situation such
as he could fill.

He had led an easy life, ordering much and working little, and had no
aptitude for any new business. He must perhaps take to day-labor, and
his wife must have help from her sisters,--a prospect doubly bitter to
him, now they had let all Bessy's precious things be sold, probably
because they liked to set her against him, by making her feel that he
had brought her to that pass. He listened to their admonitory talk,
when they came to urge on him what he was bound to do for poor Bessy's
sake, with averted eyes, that every now and then flashed on them
furtively when their backs were turned. Nothing but the dread of
needing their help could have made it an easier alternative to take
their advice.

But the strongest influence of all was the love of the old premises
where he had run about when he was a boy, just as Tom had done after
him. The Tullivers had lived on this spot for generations, and he had
sat listening on a low stool on winter evenings while his father
talked of the old half-timbered mill that had been there before the
last great floods which damaged it so that his grandfather pulled it
down and built the new one. It was when he got able to walk about and
look at all the old objects that he felt the strain of his clinging
affection for the old home as part of his life, part of himself. He
couldn't bear to think of himself living on any other spot than this,
where he knew the sound of every gate door, and felt that the shape
and color of every roof and weather-stain and broken hillock was good,
because his growing senses had been fed on them. Our instructed
vagrancy, which was hardly time to linger by the hedgerows, but runs
away early to the tropics, and is at home with palms and
banyans,--which is nourished on books of travel and stretches the
theatre of its imagination to the Zambesi,--can hardly get a dim
notion of what an old-fashioned man like Tulliver felt for this spot,
where all his memories centred, and where life seemed like a familiar
smooth-handled tool that the fingers clutch with loving ease. And just
now he was living in that freshened memory of the far-off time which
comes to us in the passive hours of recovery from sickness.

"Ay, Luke," he said one afternoon, as he stood looking over the
orchard gate, "I remember the day they planted those apple-trees. My
father was a huge man for planting,--it was like a merry-making to him
to get a cart full o' young trees; and I used to stand i' the cold
with him, and follow him about like a dog."

Then he turned round, and leaning against the gate-post, looked at the
opposite buildings.

"The old mill 'ud miss me, I think, Luke. There's a story as when the
mill changes hands, the river's angry; I've heard my father say it
many a time. There's no telling whether there mayn't be summat _in_
the story, for this is a puzzling world, and Old Harry's got a finger
in it--it's been too many for me, I know."

"Ay, sir," said Luke, with soothing sympathy, "what wi' the rust on
the wheat, an' the firin' o' the ricks an' that, as I've seen i' my
time,--things often looks comical; there's the bacon fat wi' our last
pig run away like butter,--it leaves nought but a scratchin'."

"It's just as if it was yesterday, now," Mr. Tulliver went on, "when
my father began the malting. I remember, the day they finished the
malt-house, I thought summat great was to come of it; for we'd a
plum-pudding that day and a bit of a feast, and I said to my
mother,--she was a fine dark-eyed woman, my mother was,--the little
wench 'ull be as like her as two peas." Here Mr. Tulliver put his
stick between his legs, and took out his snuff-box, for the greater
enjoyment of this anecdote, which dropped from him in fragments, as if
he every other moment lost narration in vision. "I was a little chap
no higher much than my mother's knee,--she was sore fond of us
children, Gritty and me,--and so I said to her, 'Mother,' I said,
'shall we have plum-pudding _every_ day because o' the malt-house? She
used to tell me o' that till her dying day. She was but a young woman
when she died, my mother was. But it's forty good year since they
finished the malt-house, and it isn't many days out of 'em all as I
haven't looked out into the yard there, the first thing in the
morning,--all weathers, from year's end to year's end. I should go off
my head in a new place. I should be like as if I'd lost my way. It's
all hard, whichever way I look at it,--the harness 'ull gall me, but
it 'ud be summat to draw along the old road, instead of a new un."

"Ay, sir," said Luke, "you'd be a deal better here nor in some new
place. I can't abide new places mysen: things is allays
awk'ard,--narrow-wheeled waggins, belike, and the stiles all another
sort, an' oat-cake i' some places, tow'rt th' head o' the Floss,
there. It's poor work, changing your country-side."

"But I doubt, Luke, they'll be for getting rid o' Ben, and making you
do with a lad; and I must help a bit wi' the mill. You'll have a worse
place."

"Ne'er mind, sir," said Luke, "I sha'n't plague mysen. I'n been wi'
you twenty year, an' you can't get twenty year wi' whistlin' for 'em,
no more nor you can make the trees grow: you mun wait till God
A'mighty sends 'em. I can't abide new victual nor new faces, _I_
can't,--you niver know but what they'll gripe you."

The walk was finished in silence after this, for Luke had disburthened
himself of thoughts to an extent that left his conversational
resources quite barren, and Mr. Tulliver had relapsed from his
recollections into a painful meditation on the choice of hardships
before him. Maggie noticed that he was unusually absent that evening
at tea; and afterward he sat leaning forward in his chair, looking at
the ground, moving his lips, and shaking his head from time to time.
Then he looked hard at Mrs. Tulliver, who was knitting opposite him,
then at Maggie, who, as she bent over her sewing, was intensely
conscious of some drama going forward in her father's mind. Suddenly
he took up the poker and broke the large coal fiercely.

"Dear heart, Mr. Tulliver, what can you be thinking of?" said his
wife, looking up in alarm; "it's very wasteful, breaking the coal, and
we've got hardly any large coal left, and I don't know where the rest
is to come from."

"I don't think you're quite so well to-night, are you, father?" said
Maggie; "you seem uneasy."

"Why, how is it Tom doesn't come?" said Mr. Tulliver, impatiently.

"Dear heart, is it time? I must go and get his supper," said Mrs.
Tulliver, laying down her knitting, and leaving the room.

"It's nigh upon half-past eight," said Mr. Tulliver. "He'll be here
soon. Go, go and get the big Bible, and open it at the beginning,
where everything's set down. And get the pen and ink."

Maggie obeyed, wondering; but her father gave no further orders, and
only sat listening for Tom's footfall on the gravel, apparently
irritated by the wind, which had risen, and was roaring so as to drown
all other sounds. There was a strange light in his eyes that rather
frightened Maggie; _she_ began to wish that Tom would come, too.

"There he is, then," said Mr. Tulliver, in an excited way, when the
knock came at last. Maggie went to open the door, but her mother came
out of the kitchen hurriedly, saying, "Stop a bit, Maggie; I'll open
it."

Mrs. Tulliver had begun to be a little frightened at her boy, but she
was jealous of every office others did for him.

"Your supper's ready by the kitchen-fire, my boy," she said, as he
took off his hat and coat. "You shall have it by yourself, just as you
like, and I won't speak to you."

"I think my father wants Tom, mother," said Maggie; "he must come into
the parlor first."

Tom entered with his usual saddened evening face, but his eyes fell
immediately on the open Bible and the inkstand, and he glanced with a
look of anxious surprise at his father, who was saying,--

"Come, come, you're late; I want you."

"Is there anything the matter, father?" said Tom.

"You sit down, all of you," said Mr. Tulliver, peremptorily.

"And, Tom, sit down here; I've got something for you to write i' the
Bible."

They all three sat down, looking at him. He began to speak slowly,
looking first at his wife.

"I've made up my mind, Bessy, and I'll be as good as my word to you.
There'll be the same grave made for us to lie down in, and we mustn't
be bearing one another ill-will. I'll stop in the old place, and I'll
serve under Wakem, and I'll serve him like an honest man; there's no
Tulliver but what's honest, mind that, Tom,"--here his voice
rose,--"they'll have it to throw up against me as I paid a dividend,
but it wasn't my fault; it was because there's raskills in the world.
They've been too many for me, and I must give in. I'll put my neck in
harness,--for you've a right to say as I've brought you into trouble,
Bessy,--and I'll serve him as honest as if he was no raskill; I'm an
honest man, though I shall never hold my head up no more. I'm a tree
as is broke--a tree as is broke."

He paused and looked on the ground. Then suddenly raising his head, he
said, in a louder yet deeper tone:

"But I won't forgive him! I know what they say, he never meant me any
harm. That's the way Old Harry props up the rascals. He's been at the
bottom of everything; but he's a fine gentleman,--I know, I know. I
shouldn't ha' gone to law, they say. But who made it so as there was
no arbitratin', and no justice to be got? It signifies nothing to him,
I know that; he's one o' them fine gentlemen as get money by doing
business for poorer folks, and when he's made beggars of 'em he'll
give 'em charity. I won't forgive him! I wish he might be punished
with shame till his own son 'ud like to forget him. I wish he may do
summat as they'd make him work at the treadmill! But he won't,--he's
too big a raskill to let the law lay hold on him. And you mind this,
Tom,--you never forgive him neither, if you mean to be my son.
There'll maybe come a time when you may make him feel; it'll never
come to me; I'n got my head under the yoke. Now write--write it i' the
Bible."

"Oh, father, what?" said Maggie, sinking down by his knee, pale and
trembling. "It's wicked to curse and bear malice."

"It isn't wicked, I tell you," said her father, fiercely. "It's wicked
as the raskills should prosper; it's the Devil's doing. Do as I tell
you, Tom. Write."

"What am I to write?" said Tom, with gloomy submission.

"Write as your father, Edward Tulliver, took service under John Wakem,
the man as had helped to ruin him, because I'd promised my wife to
make her what amends I could for her trouble, and because I wanted to
die in th' old place where I was born and my father was born. Put that
i' the right words--you know how--and then write, as I don't forgive
Wakem for all that; and for all I'll serve him honest, I wish evil may
befall him. Write that."

There was a dead silence as Tom's pen moved along the paper; Mrs.
Tulliver looked scared, and Maggie trembled like a leaf.

"Now let me hear what you've wrote," said Mr. Tulliver, Tom read aloud
slowly.

"Now write--write as you'll remember what Wakem's done to your father,
