"What is the matter, Maggie? Has something happened?" Philip said, in
inexpressible anxiety, his imagination being only too ready to weave
everything that was fatal to them both.

"No, nothing," said Maggie, rousing her latent will. Philip must not
have that odious thought in his mind; she would banish it from her
own. "Nothing," she repeated, "except in my own mind. You used to say
I should feel the effect of my starved life, as you called it; and I
do. I am too eager in my enjoyment of music and all luxuries, now they
are come to me."

She took up her work and occupied herself resolutely, while Philip
watched her, really in doubt whether she had anything more than this
general allusion in her mind. It was quite in Maggie's character to be
agitated by vague self-reproach. But soon there came a violent
well-known ring at the door-bell resounding through the house.

"Oh, what a startling announcement!" said Maggie, quite mistress of
herself, though not without some inward flutter. "I wonder where Lucy
is."

Lucy had not been deaf to the signal, and after an interval long
enough for a few solicitous but not hurried inquiries, she herself
ushered Stephen in.

"Well, old fellow," he said, going straight up to Philip and shaking
him heartily by the hand, bowing to Maggie in passing, "it's glorious
to have you back again; only I wish you'd conduct yourself a little
less like a sparrow with a residence on the house-top, and not go in
and out constantly without letting the servants know. This is about
the twentieth time I've had to scamper up those countless stairs to
that painting-room of yours, all to no purpose, because your people
thought you were at home. Such incidents embitter friendship."

"I've so few visitors, it seems hardly worth while to leave notice of
my exit and entrances," said Philip, feeling rather oppressed just
then by Stephen's bright strong presence and strong voice.

"Are you quite well this morning, Miss Tulliver?" said Stephen,
turning to Maggie with stiff politeness, and putting out his hand with
the air of fulfilling a social duty.

Maggie gave the tips of her fingers, and said, "Quite well, thank
you," in a tone of proud indifference. Philip's eyes were watching
them keenly; but Lucy was used to seeing variations in their manner to
each other, and only thought with regret that there was some natural
antipathy which every now and then surmounted their mutual good-will.
"Maggie is not the sort of woman Stephen admires, and she is irritated
by something in him which she interprets as conceit," was the silent
observation that accounted for everything to guileless Lucy. Stephen
and Maggie had no sooner completed this studied greeting than each
felt hurt by the other's coldness. And Stephen, while rattling on in
questions to Philip about his recent sketching expedition, was
thinking all the more about Maggie because he was not drawing her into
the conversation as he had invariably done before. "Maggie and Philip
are not looking happy," thought Lucy; "this first interview has been
saddening to them."

"I think we people who have not been galloping," she said to Stephen,
"are all a little damped by the rain. Let us have some music. We ought
to take advantage of having Philip and you together. Give us the duet
in 'Masaniello'; Maggie has not heard that, and I know it will suit
her."

"Come, then," said Stephen, going toward the piano, and giving a
foretaste of the tune in his deep "brum-brum," very pleasant to hear.

"You, please, Philip,--you play the accompaniment," said Lucy, "and
then I can go on with my work. You _will_ like to play, sha'n't you?"
she added, with a pretty, inquiring look, anxious, as usual, lest she
should have proposed what was not pleasant to another; but with
yearnings toward her unfinished embroidery.

Philip had brightened at the proposition, for there is no feeling,
perhaps, except the extremes of fear and grief, that does not find
relief in music,--that does not make a man sing or play the better;
and Philip had an abundance of pent-up feeling at this moment, as
complex as any trio or quartet that was ever meant to express love and
jealousy and resignation and fierce suspicion, all at the same time.

"Oh, yes," he said, seating himself at the piano, "it is a way of
eking out one's imperfect life and being three people at once,--to
sing and make the piano sing, and hear them both all the while,--or
else to sing and paint."

"Ah, there you are an enviable fellow. I can do nothing with my
hands," said Stephen. "That has generally been observed in men of
great administrative capacity, I believe,--a tendency to predominance
of the reflective powers in me! Haven't you observed that, Miss
Tulliver?"

Stephen had fallen by mistake into his habit of playful appeal to
Maggie, and she could not repress the answering flush and epigram.

"I _have_ observed a tendency to predominance," she said, smiling; and
Philip at that moment devoutly hoped that she found the tendency
disagreeable.

"Come, come," said Lucy; "music, music! We will discuss each other's
qualities another time."

Maggie always tried in vain to go on with her work when music began.
She tried harder than ever to-day; for the thought that Stephen knew
how much she cared for his singing was one that no longer roused a
merely playful resistance; and she knew, too, that it was his habit
always to stand so that he could look at her. But it was of no use;
she soon threw her work down, and all her intentions were lost in the
vague state of emotion produced by the inspiring duet,--emotion that
seemed to make her at once strong and weak; strong for all enjoyment,
weak for all resistance. When the strain passed into the minor, she
half started from her seat with the sudden thrill of that change. Poor
Maggie! She looked very beautiful when her soul was being played on in
this way by the inexorable power of sound. You might have seen the
slightest perceptible quivering through her whole frame as she leaned
a little forward, clasping her hands as if to steady herself; while
her eyes dilated and brightened into that wide-open, childish
expression of wondering delight which always came back in her happiest
moments. Lucy, who at other times had always been at the piano when
Maggie was looking in this way, could not resist the impulse to steal
up to her and kiss her. Philip, too, caught a glimpse of her now and
then round the open book on the desk, and felt that he had never
before seen her under so strong an influence.

"More, more!" said Lucy, when the duet had been encored. "Something
spirited again. Maggie always says she likes a great rush of sound."

"It must be 'Let us take the road,' then," said Stephen,--"so suitable
for a wet morning. But are you prepared to abandon the most sacred
duties of life, and come and sing with us?"

"Oh, yes," said Lucy, laughing. "If you will look out the 'Beggar's
Opera' from the large canterbury. It has a dingy cover."

"That is a great clue, considering there are about a score covers here
of rival dinginess," said Stephen, drawing out the canterbury.

"Oh, play something the while, Philip," said Lucy, noticing that his
fingers were wandering over the keys. "What is that you are falling
into?--something delicious that I don't know."

"Don't you know that?" said Philip, bringing out the tune more
definitely. "It's from the 'Sonnambula'--'Ah! perchè non posso
odiarti.' I don't know the opera, but it appears the tenor is telling
the heroine that he shall always love her though she may forsake him.
You've heard me sing it to the English words, 'I love thee still.'"

It was not quite unintentionally that Philip had wandered into this
song, which might be an indirect expression to Maggie of what he could
not prevail on himself to say to her directly. Her ears had been open
to what he was saying, and when he began to sing, she understood the
plaintive passion of the music. That pleading tenor had no very fine
qualities as a voice, but it was not quite new to her; it had sung to
her by snatches, in a subdued way, among the grassy walks and hollows,
and underneath the leaning ash-tree in the Red Deeps. There seemed to
be some reproach in the words; did Philip mean that? She wished she
had assured him more distinctly in their conversation that she desired
not to renew the hope of love between them, _only_ because it clashed
with her inevitable circumstances. She was touched, not thrilled by
the song; it suggested distinct memories and thoughts, and brought
quiet regret in the place of excitement.

"That's the way with you tenors," said Stephen, who was waiting with
music in his hand while Philip finished the song. "You demoralize the
fair sex by warbling your sentimental love and constancy under all
sorts of vile treatment. Nothing short of having your heads served up
in a dish like that mediæval tenor or troubadour, would prevent you
from expressing your entire resignation. I must administer an
antidote, while Miss Deane prepares to tear herself away from her
bobbins."

Stephen rolled out, with saucy energy,--

  "Shall I, wasting in despair,
  Die because a woman's fair?"

and seemed to make all the air in the room alive with a new influence.
Lucy, always proud of what Stephen did, went toward the piano with
laughing, admiring looks at him; and Maggie, in spite of her
resistance to the spirit of the song and to the singer, was taken hold
of and shaken by the invisible influence,--was borne along by a wave
too strong for her.

But, angrily resolved not to betray herself, she seized her work, and
went on making false stitches and pricking her fingers with much
perseverance, not looking up or taking notice of what was going
forward, until all the three voices united in "Let us take the road."

I am afraid there would have been a subtle, stealing gratification in
her mind if she had known how entirely this saucy, defiant Stephen was
occupied with her; how he was passing rapidly from a determination to
treat her with ostentatious indifference to an irritating desire for
some sign of inclination from her,--some interchange of subdued word
or look with her. It was not long before he found an opportunity, when
they had passed to the music of "The Tempest." Maggie, feeling the
need of a footstool, was walking across the room to get one, when
Stephen, who was not singing just then, and was conscious of all her
movements, guessed her want, and flew to anticipate her, lifting the
footstool with an entreating look at her, which made it impossible not
to return a glance of gratitude. And then, to have the footstool
placed carefully by a too self-confident personage,--not _any_
self-confident personage, but one in particular, who suddenly looks
humble and anxious, and lingers, bending still, to ask if there is not
some draught in that position between the window and the fireplace,
and if he may not be allowed to move the work-table for her,--these
things will summon a little of the too ready, traitorous tenderness
into a woman's eyes, compelled as she is in her girlish time to learn
her life-lessons in very trivial language. And to Maggie such things
had not been every-day incidents, but were a new element in her life,
and found her keen appetite for homage quite fresh. That tone of
gentle solicitude obliged her to look at the face that was bent toward
her, and to say, "No, thank you"; and nothing could prevent that
mutual glance from being delicious to both, as it had been the evening
before.

It was but an ordinary act of politeness in Stephen; it had hardly
taken two minutes; and Lucy, who was singing, scarcely noticed it. But
to Philip's mind, filled already with a vague anxiety that was likely
to find a definite ground for itself in any trivial incident, this
sudden eagerness in Stephen, and the change in Maggie's face, which
was plainly reflecting a beam from his, seemed so strong a contrast
with the previous overwrought signs of indifference, as to be charged
with painful meaning. Stephen's voice, pouring in again, jarred upon
his nervous susceptibility as if it had been the clang of sheet-iron,
and he felt inclined to make the piano shriek in utter discord. He had
really seen no communicable ground for suspecting any ususual feeling
between Stephen and Maggie; his own reason told him so, and he wanted
to go home at once that he might reflect coolly on these false images,
till he had convinced himself of their nullity. But then, again, he
wanted to stay as long as Stephen stayed,--always to be present when
Stephen was present with Maggie. It seemed to poor Philip so natural,
nay, inevitable, that any man who was near Maggie should fall in love
with her! There was no promise of happiness for her if she were
beguiled into loving Stephen Guest; and this thought emboldened Philip
to view his own love for her in the light of a less unequal offering.
He was beginning to play very falsely under this deafening inward
tumult, and Lucy was looking at him in astonishment, when Mrs.
Tulliver's entrance to summon them to lunch came as an excuse for
abruptly breaking off the music.

"Ah, Mr. Philip!" said Mr. Deane, when they entered the dining-room,
"I've not seen you for a long while. Your father's not at home, I
think, is he? I went after him to the office the other day, and they
said he was out of town."

"He's been to Mudport on business for several days," said Philip; "but
he's come back now."

"As fond of his farming hobby as ever, eh?"

"I believe so," said Philip, rather wondering at this sudden interest
in his father's pursuits.

"Ah!" said Mr. Deane, "he's got some land in his own hands on this
side the river as well as the other, I think?"

"Yes, he has."

"Ah!" continued Mr. Deane, as he dispensed the pigeonpie, "he must
find farming a heavy item,--an expensive hobby. I never had a hobby
myself, never would give in to that. And the worst of all hobbies are
those that people think they can get money at. They shoot their money
down like corn out of a sack then."

Lucy felt a little nervous under her father's apparently gratuitous
criticism of Mr. Wakem's expenditure. But it ceased there, and Mr.
Deane became unusually silent and meditative during his luncheon.
Lucy, accustomed to watch all indications in her father, and having
reasons, which had recently become strong, for an extra interest in
what referred to the Wakems, felt an unusual curiosity to know what had
prompted her father's questions. His subsequent silence made her
suspect there had been some special reason for them in his mind.

With this idea in her head, she resorted to her usual plan when she
wanted to tell or ask her father anything particular: she found a
reason for her aunt Tulliver to leaving the dining-room after dinner,
and seated herself on a small stool at her father's knee. Mr. Deane,
under those circumstances, considered that he tasted some of the most
agreeable moments his merits had purchased him in life,
notwithstanding that Lucy, disliking to have her hair powdered with
snuff, usually began by mastering his snuff-box on such occasions.

"You don't want to go to sleep yet, papa, _do_ you?" she said, as she
brought up her stool and opened the large fingers that clutched the
snuff-box.

"Not yet," said Mr. Deane, glancing at the reward of merit in the
decanter. "But what do _you_ want?" he added, pinching the dimpled
chin fondly,--"to coax some more sovereigns out of my pocket for your
bazaar? Eh?"

"No, I have no base motives at all to-day. I only want to talk, not to
beg. I want to know what made you ask Philip Wakem about his father's
farming to-day, papa? It seemed rather odd, because you never hardly
say anything to him about his father; and why should you care about
Mr. Wakem's losing money by his hobby?"

"Something to do with business," said Mr. Deane, waving his hands, as
if to repel intrusion into that mystery.

"But, papa, you always say Mr. Wakem has brought Philip up like a
girl; how came you to think you should get any business knowledge out
of him? Those abrupt questions sounded rather oddly. Philip thought
them queer."

"Nonsense, child!" said Mr. Deane, willing to justify his social
demeanor, with which he had taken some pains in his upward progress.
"There's a report that Wakem's mill and farm on the other side of the
river--Dorlcote Mill, your uncle Tulliver's, you know--isn't answering
so well as it did. I wanted to see if your friend Philip would let
anything out about his father's being tired of farming."

"Why? Would you buy the mill, papa, if he would part with it?" said
Lucy, eagerly. "Oh, tell me everything; here, you shall have your
snuff-box if you'll tell me. Because Maggie says all their hearts are
set on Tom's getting back the mill some time. It was one of the last
things her father said to Tom, that he must get back the mill."

"Hush, you little puss," said Mr. Deane, availing himself of the
restored snuff-box. "You must not say a word about this thing; do you
hear? There's very little chance of their getting the mill or of
anybody's getting it out of Wakem's hands. And if he knew that we
wanted it with a view to the Tulliver's getting it again, he'd be the
less likely to part with it. It's natural, after what happened. He
behaved well enough to Tulliver before; but a horsewhipping is not
likely to be paid for with sugar-plums."

"Now, papa," said Lucy, with a little air of solemnity, "will you
trust me? You must not ask me all my reasons for what I'm going to
say, but I have very strong reasons. And I'm very cautious; I am,
indeed."

"Well, let us hear."

"Why, I believe, if you will let me take Philip Wakem into our
confidence,--let me tell him all about your wish to buy, and what it's
for; that my cousins wish to have it, and why they wish to have it,--I
believe Philip would help to bring it about. I know he would desire to
do it."

"I don't see how that can be, child," said Mr. Deane, looking puzzled.
"Why should _he_ care?"--then, with a sudden penetrating look at his
daughter, "You don't think the poor lad's fond of you, and so you can
make him do what you like?" (Mr. Deane felt quite safe about his
daughter's affections.)

"No, papa; he cares very little about me,--not so much as I care about
him. But I have a reason for being quite sure of what I say. Don't you
ask me. And if you ever guess, don't tell me. Only give me leave to do
as I think fit about it."

Lucy rose from her stool to seat herself on her father's knee, and
kissed him with that last request.

"Are you sure you won't do mischief, now?" he said, looking at her
with delight.

"Yes, papa, quite sure. I'm very wise; I've got all your business
talents. Didn't you admire my accompt-book, now, when I showed it
you?"

"Well, well, if this youngster will keep his counsel, there won't be
much harm done. And to tell the truth, I think there's not much chance
for us any other way. Now, let me go off to sleep."



Chapter VIII

Wakem in a New Light


Before three days had passed after the conversation you have just
overheard between Lucy and her father she had contrived to have a
private interview with Philip during a visit of Maggie's to her aunt
Glegg. For a day and a night Philip turned over in his mind with
restless agitation all that Lucy had told him in that interview, till
he had thoroughly resolved on a course of action. He thought he saw
before him now a possibility of altering his position with respect to
Maggie, and removing at least one obstacle between them. He laid his
plan and calculated all his moves with the fervid deliberation of a
chess-player in the days of his first ardor, and was amazed himself at
his sudden genius as a tactician. His plan was as bold as it was
thoroughly calculated. Having watched for a moment when his father had
nothing more urgent on his hands than the newspaper, he went behind
him, laid a hand on his shoulder, and said,--

"Father, will you come up into my sanctum, and look at my new
sketches? I've arranged them now."

"I'm getting terrible stiff in the joints, Phil, for climbing those
stairs of yours," said Wakem, looking kindly at his son as he laid
down his paper. "But come along, then."

"This is a nice place for you, isn't it, Phil?--a capital light that
from the roof, eh?" was, as usual, the first thing he said on entering
the painting-room. He liked to remind himself and his son too that his
fatherly indulgence had provided the accommodation. He had been a good
father. Emily would have nothing to reproach him with there, if she
came back again from her grave.

"Come, come," he said, putting his double eye-glass over his nose, and
seating himself to take a general view while he rested, "you've got a
famous show here. Upon my word, I don't see that your things aren't as
good as that London artist's--what's his name--that Leyburn gave so
much money for."

Philip shook his head and smiled. He had seated himself on his
painting-stool, and had taken a lead pencil in his hand, with which he
was making strong marks to counteract the sense of tremulousness. He
watched his father get up, and walk slowly round, good-naturedly
dwelling on the pictures much longer than his amount of genuine taste
for landscape would have prompted, till he stopped before a stand on
which two pictures were placed,--one much larger than the other, the
smaller one in a leather case.

"Bless me! what have you here?" said Wakem, startled by a sudden
transition from landscape to portrait. "I thought you'd left off
figures. Who are these?"

"They are the same person," said Philip, with calm promptness, "at
different ages."

"And what person?" said Wakem, sharply fixing his eyes with a growing
look of suspicion on the larger picture.

"Miss Tulliver. The small one is something like what she was when I
was at school with her brother at King's Lorton; the larger one is not
quite so good a likeness of what she was when I came from abroad."

Wakem turned round fiercely, with a flushed face, letting his
eye-glass fall, and looking at his son with a savage expression for a
moment, as if he was ready to strike that daring feebleness from the
stool. But he threw himself into the armchair again, and thrust his
hands into his trouser-pockets, still looking angrily at his son,
however. Philip did not return the look, but sat quietly watching the
point of his pencil.

"And do you mean to say, then, that you have had any acquaintance with
her since you came from abroad?" said Wakem, at last, with that vain
effort which rage always makes to throw as much punishment as it
desires to inflict into words and tones, since blows are forbidden.

"Yes; I saw a great deal of her for a whole year before her father's
death. We met often in that thicket--the Red Deeps--near Dorlcote
Mill. I love her dearly; I shall never love any other woman. I have
thought of her ever since she was a little girl."

"Go on, sir! And you have corresponded with her all this while?"

"No. I never told her I loved her till just before we parted, and she
promised her brother not to see me again or to correspond with me. I
am not sure that she loves me or would consent to marry me. But if she
would consent,--if she _did_ love me well enough,--I should marry
her."

"And this is the return you make me for all the indulgences I've
heaped on you?" said Wakem, getting white, and beginning to tremble
under an enraged sense of impotence before Philip's calm defiance and
concentration of purpose.

"No, father," said Philip, looking up at him for the first time; "I
don't regard it as a return. You have been an indulgent father to me;
but I have always felt that it was because you had an affectionate
wish to give me as much happiness as my unfortunate lot would admit,
not that it was a debt you expected me to pay by sacrificing all my
chances of happiness to satisfy feelings of yours which I can never
share."

"I think most sons would share their father's feelings in this case,"
said Wakem, bitterly. "The girl's father was an ignorant mad brute,
who was within an inch of murdering me. The whole town knows it. And
the brother is just as insolent, only in a cooler way. He forbade her
seeing you, you say; he'll break every bone in your body, for your
greater happiness, if you don't take care. But you seem to have made
up your mind; you have counted the consequences, I suppose. Of course
you are independent of me; you can marry this girl to-morrow, if you
like; you are a man of five-and-twenty,--you can go your way, and I
can go mine. We need have no more to do with each other."

Wakem rose and walked toward the door, but something held him back,
and instead of leaving the room, he walked up and down it. Philip was
slow to reply, and when he spoke, his tone had a more incisive
quietness and clearness than ever.

"No; I can't marry Miss Tulliver, even if she would have me, if I have
only my own resources to maintain her with. I have been brought up to
no profession. I can't offer her poverty as well as deformity."

"Ah, _there_ is a reason for your clinging to me, doubtless," said
Wakem, still bitterly, though Philip's last words had given him a
pang; they had stirred a feeling which had been a habit for a quarter
of a century. He threw himself into the chair again.

"I expected all this," said Philip. "I know these scenes are often
happening between father and son. If I were like other men of my age,
I might answer your angry words by still angrier; we might part; I
should marry the woman I love, and have a chance of being as happy as
the rest. But if it will be a satisfaction to you to annihilate the
very object of everything you've done for me, you have an advantage
over most fathers; you can completely deprive me of the only thing
that would make my life worth having."

Philip paused, but his father was silent.

"You know best what satisfaction you would have, beyond that of
gratifying a ridiculous rancor worthy only of wandering savages."

"Ridiculous rancor!" Wakem burst out. "What do you mean? Damn it! is a
man to be horsewhipped by a boor and love him for it? Besides, there's
that cold, proud devil of a son, who said a word to me I shall not
forget when we had the settling. He would be as pleasant a mark for a
bullet as I know, if he were worth the expense."

"I don't mean your resentment toward them," said Philip, who had his
reasons for some sympathy with this view of Tom, "though a feeling of
revenge is not worth much, that you should care to keep it. I mean
your extending the enmity to a helpless girl, who has too much sense
and goodness to share their narrow prejudices. _She_ has never entered
into the family quarrels."

"What does that signify? We don't ask what a woman does; we ask whom
she belongs to. It's altogether a degrading thing to you, to think of
marrying old Tulliver's daughter."

For the first time in the dialogue, Philip lost some of his
self-control, and colored with anger.

"Miss Tulliver," he said, with bitter incisiveness, "has the only
grounds of rank that anything but vulgar folly can suppose to belong
to the middle class; she is thoroughly refined, and her friends,
whatever else they may be, are respected for irreproachable honor and
integrity. All St. Ogg's, I fancy, would pronounce her to be more than
my equal."

Wakem darted a glance of fierce question at his son; but Philip was
not looking at him, and with a certain penitent consciousness went on,
in a few moments, as if in amplification of his last words,--

"Find a single person in St. Ogg's who will not tell you that a
beautiful creature like her would be throwing herself away on a
pitiable object like me."

"Not she!" said Wakem, rising again, and forgetting everything else in
a burst of resentful pride, half fatherly, half personal. "It would be
a deuced fine match for her. It's all stuff about an accidental
deformity, when a girl's really attached to a man."

"But girls are not apt to get attached under those circumstances,"
said Philip.

"Well, then," said Wakem, rather brutally, trying to recover his
previous position, "if she doesn't care for you, you might have spared
yourself the trouble of talking to me about her, and you might have
spared me the trouble of refusing my consent to what was never likely
to happen."

Wakem strode to the door, and without looking round again, banged it
after him.

Philip was not without confidence that his father would be ultimately
wrought upon as he had expected, by what had passed; but the scene had
jarred upon his nerves, which were as sensitive as a woman's. He
determined not to go down to dinner; he couldn't meet his father again
that day. It was Wakem's habit, when he had no company at home, to go
out in the evening, often as early as half-past seven; and as it was
far on in the afternoon now, Philip locked up his room and went out
for a long ramble, thinking he would not return until his father was
out of the house again. He got into a boat, and went down the river to
a favorite village, where he dined, and lingered till it was late
enough for him to return. He had never had any sort of quarrel with
his father before, and had a sickening fear that this contest, just
begun, might go on for weeks; and what might not happen in that time?
He would not allow himself to define what that involuntary question
meant. But if he could once be in the position of Maggie's accepted,
acknowledged lover, there would be less room for vague dread. He went
up to his painting-room again, and threw himself with a sense of
fatigue into the armchair, looking round absently at the views of
water and rock that were ranged around, till he fell into a doze, in
which he fancied Maggie was slipping down a glistening, green, slimy
channel of a waterfall, and he was looking on helpless, till he was
awakened by what seemed a sudden, awful crash.

It was the opening of the door, and he could hardly have dozed more
than a few moments, for there was no perceptible change in the evening
light. It was his father who entered; and when Philip moved to vacate
the chair for him, he said,--

"Sit still. I'd rather walk about."

He stalked up and down the room once or twice, and then, standing
opposite Philip with his hands thrust in his side pockets, he said, as
if continuing a conversation that had not been broken off,--

"But this girl seems to have been fond of you, Phil, else she wouldn't
have met you in that way."

Philip's heart was beating rapidly, and a transient flush passed over
his face like a gleam. It was not quite easy to speak at once.

"She liked me at King's Lorton, when she was a little girl, because I
used to sit with her brother a great deal when he had hurt his foot.
She had kept that in her memory, and thought of me as a friend of a
long while ago. She didn't think of me as a lover when she met me."

"Well, but you made love to her at last. What did she say then?" said
Wakem, walking about again.

"She said she _did_ love me then."

"Confound it, then; what else do you want? Is she a jilt?"

"She was very young then," said Philip, hesitatingly. "I'm afraid she
hardly knew what she felt. I'm afraid our long separation, and the
idea that events must always divide us, may have made a difference."

"But she's in the town. I've seen her at church. Haven't you spoken to
her since you came back?"

"Yes, at Mr. Deane's. But I couldn't renew my proposals to her on
several grounds. One obstacle would be removed if you would give your
consent,--if you would be willing to think of her as a daughter-in-law."

Wakem was silent a little while, pausing before Maggie's picture.

"She's not the sort of woman your mother was, though, Phil," he said,
at last. "I saw her at church,--she's handsomer than this,--deuced
fine eyes and fine figure, I saw; but rather dangerous and
unmanageable, eh?"

"She's very tender and affectionate, and so simple,--without the airs
and petty contrivances other women have."

"Ah?" said Wakem. Then looking round at his son, "But your mother
looked gentler; she had that brown wavy hair and gray eyes, like
yours. You can't remember her very well. It was a thousand pities I'd
no likeness of her."

"Then, shouldn't you be glad for me to have the same sort of
happiness, father, to sweeten my life for me? There can never be
another tie so strong to you as that which began eight-and-twenty
years ago, when you married my mother, and you have been tightening it
ever since."

"Ah, Phil, you're the only fellow that knows the best of me," said
Wakem, giving his hand to his son. "We must keep together if we can.
And now, what am I to do? You must come downstairs and tell me. Am I
to go and call on this dark-eyed damsel?"

The barrier once thrown down in this way, Philip could talk freely to
his father of their entire relation with the Tullivers,--of the desire
to get the mill and land back into the family, and of its transfer to
Guest & Co. as an intermediate step. He could venture now to be
persuasive and urgent, and his father yielded with more readiness than
he had calculated on.

"_I_ don't care about the mill," he said at last, with a sort of angry
compliance. "I've had an infernal deal of bother lately about the
mill. Let them pay me for my improvements, that's all. But there's one
thing you needn't ask me. I shall have no direct transactions with
young Tulliver. If you like to swallow him for his sister's sake, you
may; but I've no sauce that will make him go down."

I leave you to imagine the agreeable feelings with which Philip went
to Mr. Deane the next day, to say that Mr. Wakem was ready to open the
negotiations, and Lucy's pretty triumph as she appealed to her father
whether she had not proved her great business abilities. Mr. Deane was
rather puzzled, and suspected that there had been something "going on"
among the young people to which he wanted a clew. But to men of Mr.
Deane's stamp, what goes on among the young people is as extraneous to
the real business of life as what goes on among the birds and
butterflies, until it can be shown to have a malign bearing on
monetary affairs. And in this case the bearing appeared to be entirely
propitious.



Chapter IX

Charity in Full-Dress


The culmination of Maggie's career as an admired member of society in
St. Ogg's was certainly the day of the bazaar, when her simple noble
beauty, clad in a white muslin of some soft-floating kind, which I
suspect must have come from the stores of aunt Pullet's wardrobe,
appeared with marked distinction among the more adorned and
conventional women around her. We perhaps never detect how much of our
social demeanor is made up of artificial airs until we see a person
who is at once beautiful and simple; without the beauty, we are apt to
call simplicity awkwardness. The Miss Guests were much too well-bred
to have any of the grimaces and affected tones that belong to
pretentious vulgarity; but their stall being next to the one where
Maggie sat, it seemed newly obvious to-day that Miss Guest held her
chin too high, and that Miss Laura spoke and moved continually with a
view to effect.

All well-dressed St. Ogg's and its neighborhood were there; and it
would have been worth while to come even from a distance, to see the
fine old hall, with its open roof and carved oaken rafters, and great
oaken folding-doors, and light shed down from a height on the
many-colored show beneath; a very quaint place, with broad faded
stripes painted on the walls, and here and there a show of heraldic
animals of a bristly, long-snouted character, the cherished emblems of
a noble family once the seigniors of this now civic hall. A grand
arch, cut in the upper wall at one end, surmounted an oaken orchestra,
with an open room behind it, where hothouse plants and stalls for
refreshments were disposed; an agreeable resort for gentlemen disposed
to loiter, and yet to exchange the occasional crush down below for a
more commodious point of view. In fact, the perfect fitness of this
ancient building for an admirable modern purpose, that made charity
truly elegant, and led through vanity up to the supply of a deficit,
was so striking that hardly a person entered the room without
exchanging the remark more than once. Near the great arch over the
orchestra was the stone oriel with painted glass, which was one of the
venerable inconsistencies of the old hall; and it was close by this
that Lucy had her stall, for the convenience of certain large plain
articles which she had taken charge of for Mrs. Kenn. Maggie had
begged to sit at the open end of the stall, and to have the sale of
these articles rather than of bead-mats and other elaborate products
of which she had but a dim understanding. But it soon appeared that
the gentlemen's dressing-gowns, which were among her commodities, were
objects of such general attention and inquiry, and excited so
troublesome a curiosity as to their lining and comparative merits,
together with a determination to test them by trying on, as to make
her post a very conspicuous one. The ladies who had commodities of
their own to sell, and did not want dressing-gowns, saw at once the
frivolity and bad taste of this masculine preference for goods which
any tailor could furnish; and it is possible that the emphatic notice
of various kinds which was drawn toward Miss Tulliver on this public
occasion, threw a very strong and unmistakable light on her subsequent
conduct in many minds then present. Not that anger, on account of
spurned beauty can dwell in the celestial breasts of charitable
ladies, but rather that the errors of persons who have once been much
admired necessarily take a deeper tinge from the mere force of
contrast; and also, that to-day Maggie's conspicuous position, for the
first time, made evident certain characteristics which were
subsequently felt to have an explanatory bearing. There was something
rather bold in Miss Tulliver's direct gaze, and something undefinably
coarse in the style of her beauty, which placed her, in the opinion of
all feminine judges, far below her cousin Miss Deane; for the ladies
of St. Ogg's had now completely ceded to Lucy their hypothetic claims
on the admiration of Mr. Stephen Guest.

As for dear little Lucy herself, her late benevolent triumph about the
Mill, and all the affectionate projects she was cherishing for Maggie
and Philip, helped to give her the highest spirits to-day, and she
felt nothing but pleasure in the evidence of Maggie's attractiveness.
It is true, she was looking very charming herself, and Stephen was
paying her the utmost attention on this public occasion; jealously
buying up the articles he had seen under her fingers in the process of
making, and gayly helping her to cajole the male customers into the
purchase of the most effeminate futilities. He chose to lay aside his
hat and wear a scarlet fez of her embroidering; but by superficial
observers this was necessarily liable to be interpreted less as a
compliment to Lucy than as a mark of coxcombry. "Guest is a great
coxcomb," young Torry observed; "but then he is a privileged person in
St. Ogg's--he carries all before him; if another fellow did such
things, everybody would say he made a fool of himself."

And Stephen purchased absolutely nothing from Maggie, until Lucy said,
in rather a vexed undertone,--

"See, now; all the things of Maggie's knitting will be gone, and you
will not have bought one. There are those deliciously soft warm things
for the wrists,--do buy them."

"Oh no," said Stephen, "they must be intended for imaginative persons,
who can chill themselves on this warm day by thinking of the frosty
Caucasus. Stern reason is my forte, you know. You must get Philip to
buy those. By the way, why doesn't he come?"

"He never likes going where there are many people, though I enjoined
him to come. He said he would buy up any of my goods that the rest of
the world rejected. But now, do go and buy something of Maggie."

"No, no; see, she has got a customer; there is old Wakem himself just
coming up."

Lucy's eyes turned with anxious interest toward Maggie to see how she
went through this first interview, since a sadly memorable time, with
a man toward whom she must have so strange a mixture of feelings; but
she was pleased to notice that Wakem had tact enough to enter at once
into talk about the bazaar wares, and appear interested in purchasing,
smiling now and then kindly at Maggie, and not calling on her to speak
much, as if he observed that she was rather pale and tremulous.

"Why, Wakem is making himself particularly amiable to your cousin,"
said Stephen, in an undertone to Lucy; "is it pure magnanimity? You
talked of a family quarrel."

"Oh, that will soon be quite healed, I hope," said Lucy, becoming a
little indiscreet in her satisfaction, and speaking with an air of
significance. But Stephen did not appear to notice this, and as some
lady-purchasers came up, he lounged on toward Maggie's end, handling
trifles and standing aloof until Wakem, who had taken out his purse,
had finished his transactions.

"My son came with me," he overheard Wakem saying, "but he has vanished
into some other part of the building, and has left all these
charitable gallantries to me. I hope you'll reproach him for his
shabby conduct."

She returned his smile and bow without speaking, and he turned away,
only then observing Stephen and nodding to him. Maggie, conscious that
Stephen was still there, busied herself with counting money, and
avoided looking up. She had been well pleased that he had devoted
himself to Lucy to-day, and had not come near her. They had begun the
morning with an indifferent salutation, and both had rejoiced in being
aloof from each other, like a patient who has actually done without
his opium, in spite of former failures in resolution. And during the
last few days they had even been making up their minds to failures,
looking to the outward events that must soon come to separate them, as
a reason for dispensing with self-conquest in detail.

Stephen moved step by step as if he were being unwillingly dragged,
until he had got round the open end of the stall, and was half hidden
by a screen of draperies. Maggie went on counting her money till she
suddenly heard a deep gentle voice saying, "Aren't you very tried? Do
let me bring you something,--some fruit or jelly, mayn't I?"

The unexpected tones shook her like a sudden accidental vibration of a
harp close by her.

"Oh no, thank you," she said faintly, and only half looking up for an
instant.

"You look so pale," Stephen insisted, in a more entreating tone. "I'm
sure you're exhausted. I must disobey you, and bring something."

"No, indeed, I couldn't take it."

"Are you angry with me? What have I done? _Do_ look at me."

"Pray, go away," said Maggie, looking at him helplessly, her eyes
glancing immediately from him to the opposite corner of the orchestra,
which was half hidden by the folds of the old faded green curtain.
Maggie had no sooner uttered this entreaty than she was wretched at
the admission it implied; but Stephen turned away at once, and
following her upward glance, he saw Philip Wakem sealed in the
half-hidden corner, so that he could command little more than that
angle of the hall in which Maggie sat. An entirely new though occurred
to Stephen, and linking itself with what he had observed of Wakem's
manner, and with Lucy's reply to his observation, it convinced him
that there had been some former relation between Philip and Maggie
beyond that childish one of which he had heard. More than one impulse
made him immediately leave the hall and go upstairs to the
refreshment-room, where, walking up to Philip, he sat down behind him,
and put his hand on his shoulder.

"Are you studying for a portrait, Phil," he said, "or for a sketch of
that oriel window? By George, it makes a capital bit from this dark
corner, with the curtain just marking it off."

"I have been studying expression," said Philip, curtly.

"What! Miss Tulliver's? It's rather of the savage-moody order to-day,
I think,--something of the fallen princess serving behind a counter.
Her cousin sent me to her with a civil offer to get her some
refreshment, but I have been snubbed, as usual. There's natural
antipathy between us, I suppose; I have seldom the honor to please
her."

"What a hypocrite you are!" said Philip, flushing angrily.

"What! because experience must have told me that I'm universally
pleasing? I admit the law, but there's some disturbing force here."

"I am going," said Philip, rising abruptly.

"So am I--to get a breath of fresh air; this place gets oppressive. I
think I have done suit and service long enough."

The two friends walked downstairs together without speaking. Philip
turned through the outer door into the court-yard; but Stephen,
saying, "Oh, by the by, I must call in here," went on along the
passage to one of the rooms at the other end of the building, which
were appropriated to the town library. He had the room all to himself,
and a man requires nothing less than this when he wants to dash his
cap on the table, throw himself astride a chair, and stare at a high
brick wall with a frown which would not have been beneath the occasion
if he had been slaying "the giant Python." The conduct that issues
from a moral conflict has often so close a resemblance to vice that
the distinction escapes all outward judgments founded on a mere
comparison of actions. It is clear to you, I hope, that Stephen was
not a hypocrite,--capable of deliberate doubleness for a selfish end;
and yet his fluctuations between the indulgence of a feeling and the
systematic concealment of it might have made a good case in support of
Philip's accusation.

Meanwhile, Maggie sat at her stall cold and trembling, with that
painful sensation in the eyes which comes from resolutely repressed
tears. Was her life to be always like this,--always bringing some new
source of inward strife? She heard confusedly the busy, indifferent
voices around her, and wished her mind could flow into that easy
babbling current. It was at this moment that Dr. Kenn, who had quite
lately come into the hall, and was now walking down the middle with
his hands behind him, taking a general view, fixed his eyes on Maggie
for the first time, and was struck with the expression of pain on her
beautiful face. She was sitting quite still, for the stream of
customers had lessened at this late hour in the afternoon; the
gentlemen had chiefly chosen the middle of the day, and Maggie's stall
was looking rather bare. This, with her absent, pained expression,
finished the contrast between her and her companions, who were all
bright, eager, and busy. He was strongly arrested. Her face had
naturally drawn his attention as a new and striking one at church, and
he had been introduced to her during a short call on business at Mr.
Deane's, but he had never spoken more than three words to her. He
walked toward her now, and Maggie, perceiving some one approaching,
roused herself to look up and be prepared to speak. She felt a
childlike, instinctive relief from the sense of uneasiness in this
exertion, when she saw it was Dr. Kenn's face that was looking at her;
that plain, middle-aged face, with a grave, penetrating kindness in
it, seeming to tell of a human being who had reached a firm, safe
strand, but was looking with helpful pity toward the strugglers still
tossed by the waves, had an effect on Maggie at this moment which was
afterward remembered by her as if it had been a promise. The
middle-aged, who have lived through their strongest emotions, but are
yet in the time when memory is still half passionate and not merely
contemplative, should surely be a sort of natural priesthood, whom
life has disciplined and consecrated to be the refuge and rescue of
early stumblers and victims of self-despair. Most of us, at some
moment in our young lives, would have welcomed a priest of that
natural order in any sort of canonicals or uncanonicals, but had to
scramble upward into all the difficulties of nineteen entirely without
such aid, as Maggie did.

"You find your office rather a fatiguing one, I fear, Miss Tulliver,"
said Dr. Kenn.

"It is, rather," said Maggie, simply, not being accustomed to simpler
amiable denials of obvious facts.

"But I can tell Mrs. Kenn that you have disposed of her goods very
quickly," he added; "she will be very much obliged to you."

"Oh, I have done nothing; the gentlemen came very fast to buy the
dressing-gowns and embroidered waistcoats, but I think any of the
other ladies would have sold more; I didn't know what to say about
them."

Dr. Kenn smiled. "I hope I'm going to have you as a permanent
parishioner now, Miss Tulliver; am I? You have been at a distance from
us hitherto."

"I have been a teacher in a school, and I'm going into another
situation of the same kind very soon."

"Ah? I was hoping you would remain among your friends, who are all in
this neighborhood, I believe."

"Oh, _I must go_," said Maggie, earnestly, looking at Dr. Kenn with an
expression of reliance, as if she had told him her history in those
three words. It was one of those moments of implicit revelation which
will sometimes happen even between people who meet quite
transiently,--on a mile's journey, perhaps, or when resting by the
wayside. There is always this possibility of a word or look from a
stranger to keep alive the sense of human brotherhood.

Dr. Kenn's ear and eye took in all the signs that this brief
confidence of Maggie's was charged with meaning.

"I understand," he said; "you feel it right to go. But that will not
prevent our meeting again, I hope; it will not prevent my knowing you
better, if I can be of any service to you."

He put out his hand and pressed hers kindly before he turned away.

"She has some trouble or other at heart," he thought. "Poor child! she
looks as if she might turn out to be one of

  'The souls by nature pitched too high,
  By suffering plunged too low.'

"There's something wonderfully honest in those beautiful eyes."

It may be surprising that Maggie, among whose many imperfections an
excessive delight in admiration and acknowledged supremacy were not
absent now, any more than when she was instructing the gypsies with a
view toward achieving a royal position among them, was not more elated
on a day when she had had the tribute of so many looks and smiles,
together with that satisfactory consciousness which had necessarily
come from being taken before Lucy's chevalglass, and made to look at
the full length of her tall beauty, crowned by the night of her massy
hair. Maggie had smiled at herself then, and for the moment had
forgotten everything in the sense of her own beauty. If that state of
mind could have lasted, her choice would have been to have Stephen
Guest at her feet, offering her a life filled with all luxuries, with
daily incense of adoration near and distant, and with all
possibilities of culture at her command. But there were things in her
stronger than vanity,--passion and affection, and long, deep memories
of early discipline and effort, of early claims on her love and pity;
and the stream of vanity was soon swept along and mingled
imperceptibly with that wider current which was at its highest force
today, under the double urgency of the events and inward impulses
brought by the last week.

Philip had not spoken to her himself about the removal of obstacles
between them on his father's side,--he shrank from that; but he had
told everything to Lucy, with the hope that Maggie, being informed
through her, might give him some encouraging sign that their being
