best and kindest I ever knew, and so overflowing with natural wit and
humour that there was no resisting his cheerful influence. To the
amazement of every one who knew him, he married perhaps the dullest
woman he could have found. Mrs. Poppleton not only never made a joke,
but couldn't understand what joking meant. Only the flattest literalism
was intelligible to her; she could follow nothing but the very macadam
of conversation--had no palate for anything but the suet-pudding of
talk.'

Rhoda's eyes twinkled, and Miss Barfoot laughed. Everard was allowing
himself a freedom in expression which hitherto he had sedulously
avoided.

'Yes,' he continued, 'she was by birth a lady--which made the
infliction harder to bear. Poor old Poppleton! Again and again I have
heard him--what do you think?--laboriously _explaining_ jests to her.
That was a trial, as you may imagine. There we sat, we three, in the
unbeautiful little parlour--for they were anything but rich. Poppleton
would say something that convulsed me with laughter--in spite of my
efforts, for I always dreaded the result so much that I strove my
hardest to do no more than smile appreciation. My laugh compelled Mrs.
Poppleton to stare at me--oh, her eyes! Thereupon, her husband began
his dread performance. The patience, the heroic patience, of that dear,
good fellow! I have known him explain, and re-explain, for a quarter of
an hour, and invariably without success. It might be a mere pun; Mrs.
Poppleton no more understood the nature of a pun than of the binomial
theorem. But worse was when the jest involved some allusion. When I
heard Poppleton begin to elucidate, to expound, the perspiration
already on his forehead, I looked at him with imploring anguish. Why
_would_ he attempt the impossible? But the kind fellow couldn't
disregard his wife's request. Shall I ever forget her. "Oh--yes--I
see"?--when obviously she saw nothing but the wall at which she sat
staring.'

'I have known her like,' said Miss Barfoot merrily.

'I am convinced his madness didn't come from business anxiety. It was
the necessity, ever recurring, ever before him, of expounding jokes to
his wife. Believe me, it was nothing but that.'

'It seems very probable,' asserted Rhoda dryly.

'Then there's another friend of yours whose marriage has been
unfortunate,' said the hostess. 'They tell me that Mr. Orchard has
forsaken his wife, and without intelligible reason.'

'There, too, I can offer an explanation,' replied Barfoot quietly,
'though you may doubt whether it justifies him. I met Orchard a few
months ago in Alexandria, met him by chance in the street, and didn't
recognize him until he spoke to me. He was worn to skin and bone. I
found that he had abandoned all his possessions to Mrs. Orchard, and
just kept himself alive on casual work for the magazines, wandering
about the shores of the Mediterranean like an uneasy spirit. He showed
me the thing he had last written, and I see it is published in this
month's _Macmillan_. Do read it. An exquisite description of a night in
Alexandria. One of these days he will starve to death. A pity; he might
have done fine work.'

'But we await your explanation. What business has he to desert his wife
and children?'

'Let me give an account of a day I spent with him at Tintern, not long
before I left England. He and his wife were having a holiday there, and
I called on them. We went to walk about the Abbey. Now, for some two
hours--I will be strictly truthful--whilst we were in the midst of that
lovely scenery, Mrs. Orchard discoursed unceasingly of one subject--the
difficulty she had with her domestic servants. Ten or twelve of these
handmaidens were marshalled before our imagination; their names, their
ages, their antecedents, the wages they received, were carefully
specified. We listened to a _catalogue raisonne_ of the plates, cups,
and other utensils that they had broken. We heard of the enormities
which in each case led to their dismissal. Orchard tried repeatedly to
change the subject, but only with the effect of irritating his wife.
What could he or I do but patiently give ear? Our walk was ruined, but
there was no help for it. Now, be good enough to extend this kind of
thing over a number of years. Picture Orchard sitting down in his home
to literary work, and liable at any moment to an invasion from Mrs.
Orchard, who comes to tell him, at great length, that the butcher has
charged for a joint they have not consumed--or something of that kind.
He assured me that his choice lay between flight and suicide, and I
firmly believed him.'

As he concluded, his eyes met those of Miss Nunn, and the latter
suddenly spoke.

'Why will men marry fools?'

Barfoot was startled. He looked down into his plate, smiling.

'A most sensible question,' said the hostess, with a laugh. 'Why,
indeed?'

'But a difficult one to answer,' remarked Everard, with his most
restrained smile. 'Possibly, Miss Nunn, narrow social opportunity has
something to do with it. They must marry some one, and in the case of
most men choice is seriously restricted.'

'I should have thought,' replied Rhoda, elevating her eyebrows, 'that
to live alone was the less of two evils.'

'Undoubtedly. But men like these two we have been speaking of haven't a
very logical mind.'

Miss Barfoot changed the topic.

When, not long after, the ladies left him to meditate over his glass of
wine, Everard curiously surveyed the room. Then his eyelids drooped, he
smiled absently, and a calm sigh seemed to relieve his chest. The
claret had no particular quality to recommend it, and in any case he
would have drunk very little, for as regards the bottle his nature was
abstemious.

'It is as I expected,' Miss Barfoot was saying to her friend in the
drawing-room. 'He has changed very noticeably.'

'Mr. Barfoot isn't quite the man your remarks had suggested to me,'
Rhoda replied.

'I fancy he is no longer the man I knew. His manners are wonderfully
improved. He used to assert himself in rather alarming ways. His
letter, to be sure, had the old tone, or something of it.'

'I will go to the library for an hour,' said Rhoda, who had not seated
herself. 'Mr. Barfoot won't leave before ten, I suppose?'

'I don't think there will be any private talk.'

'Still, if you will let me--'

So, when Everard appeared, he found his cousin alone.

'What are you going to do?' she asked of him good-naturedly.

'To do? You mean, how do I propose to employ myself? I have nothing
whatever in view, beyond enjoying life.'

'At your age?'

'So young? Or so old? Which?'

'So young, of course. You deliberately intend to waste your life?'

'To enjoy it, I said. I am not prompted to any business or profession;
that's all over for me; I have learnt all I care to of the active
world.'

'But what do you understand by enjoyment?' asked Miss Barfoot, with
knitted brows.

'Isn't the spectacle of existence quite enough to occupy one through a
lifetime? If a man merely travelled, could he possibly exhaust all the
beauties and magnificences that are offered to him in every country?
For ten years and more I worked as hard as any man; I shall never
regret it, for it has given me a feeling of liberty and opportunity
such as I should not have known if I had always lived at my ease. It
taught me a great deal, too; supplemented my so-called education as
nothing else could have done. But to work for ever is to lose half of
life. I can't understand those people who reconcile themselves to
quitting the world without having seen a millionth part of it.'

'I am quite reconciled to that. An infinite picture gallery isn't my
idea of enjoyment.'

'Nor mine. But an infinite series of modes of living. A ceaseless
exercise of all one's faculties of pleasure. That sounds shameless to
you? I can't understand why it should. Why is the man who toils more
meritorious than he who enjoys? What is the sanction for this judgment?'

'Social usefulness, Everard.'

'I admit the demand for social usefulness, up to a certain point. But,
really, I have done my share. The mass of men don't toil with any such
ideal, but merely to keep themselves alive, or to get wealth. I think
there is a vast amount of unnecessary labour.'

'There is an old proverb about Satan and idle hands. Pardon me; you
alluded to that personage in your letter.'

'The proverb is a very true one, but, like other proverbs, it applies
to the multitude. If I get into mischief, it will not be because I
don't perspire for so many hours every day, but simply because it is
human to err. I have no intention whatever of getting into mischief.'

The speaker stroked his beard, and smiled with a distant look.

'Your purpose is intensely selfish, and all indulged selfishness reacts
on the character,' replied Miss Barfoot, still in a tone of the
friendliest criticism.

'My dear cousin, for anything to be selfish, it must be a deliberate
refusal of what one believes to be duty. I don't admit that I am
neglecting any duty to others, and the duty to myself seems very clear
indeed.'

'Of _that_ I have no doubt,' exclaimed the other, laughing. 'I see that
you have refined your arguments.'

'Not my arguments only, I hope,' said Everard modestly. 'My time has
been very ill spent if I haven't in some degree, refined my nature.'

'That sounds very well, Everard. But when it comes to degrees of
self-indulgence--'

She paused and made a gesture of dissatisfaction.

'It comes to that, surely, with every man. But we certainly shall not
agree on this subject. You stand at the social point of view; I am an
individualist. You have the advantage of a tolerably consistent theory;
whilst I have no theory at all, and am full of contradictions. The only
thing clear to me is that I have a right to make the most of my life.'

'No matter at whose expense?'

'You are quite mistaken. My conscience is a tender one. I dread to do
any one an injury. That has always been true of me, in spite of your
sceptical look; and the tendency increases as I grow older. Let us have
done with so unimportant a matter. Isn't Miss Nunn able to rejoin us?'

'She will come presently, I think.'

'How did you make this lady's acquaintance?'

Miss Barfoot explained the circumstances.

'She makes an impression,' resumed Everard. 'A strong character, of
course. More decidedly one of the new women than you yourself--isn't
she?'

'Oh, _I_ am a very old-fashioned woman. Women have thought as I do at
any time in history. Miss Nunn has much more zeal for womanhood
militant.'

'I should delight to talk with her. Really, you know, I am very
strongly on your side.'

Miss Barfoot laughed.

'Oh, sophist! You despise women.'

'Why, yes, the great majority of women--the typical woman. All the more
reason for my admiring the exceptions, and wishing to see them become
more common. You, undoubtedly, despise the average woman.'

'I despise no human being, Everard.'

'Oh, in a sense! But Miss Nunn, I feel sure, would agree with me.'

'I am very sure Miss Nunn wouldn't. She doesn't admire the feebler
female, but that is very far from being at one with _your_ point of
view, my cousin.'

Everard mused with a smile.

'I must get to understand her line of thought. You permit me to call
upon you now and then?'

'Oh, whenever you like, in the evening. Except,' Miss Barfoot added,
'Wednesday evening. Then we are always engaged.'

'Summer holidays are unknown to you, I suppose?'

'Not altogether. I had mine a few weeks ago. Miss Nunn will be going
away in a fortnight, I think.'

Just before ten o'clock, when Barfoot was talking of some acquaintances
he had left in Japan, Rhoda entered the room. She seemed little
disposed for conversation, and Everard did not care to assail her
taciturnity this evening. He talked on a little longer, observing her
as she listened, and presently took an opportunity to rise for
departure.

'Wednesday is the forbidden evening, is it not?' he said to his cousin.

'Yes, that is devoted to business.'

As soon as he had gone, the friends exchanged a look. Each understood
the other as referring to this point of Wednesday evening, but neither
made a remark. They were silent for some time. When Rhoda at length
spoke it was in a tone of half-indifferent curiosity.

'You are sure you haven't exaggerated Mr. Barfoot's failings?'

The reply was delayed for a moment.

'I was a little indiscreet to speak of him at all. But no, I didn't
exaggerate.'

'Curious,' mused the other dispassionately, as she stood with one foot
on the fender. 'He hardly strikes one as that kind of man.'

'Oh, he has certainly changed a great deal.'

Miss Barfoot went on to speak of her cousin's resolve to pursue no
calling.

'His means are very modest. I feel rather guilty before him; his father
bequeathed to me much of the money that would in the natural course
have been Everard's. But he is quite superior to any feeling of grudge
on that score.'

'Practically, his father disinherited him?'

'It amounted to that. From quite a child, Everard was at odds with his
father. A strange thing, for in so many respects they resembled each
other very closely. Physically, Everard is his father walking the earth
again. In character, too, I think they must be very much alike. They
couldn't talk about the simplest thing without disagreeing. My uncle
had risen from the ranks but he disliked to be reminded of it. He
disliked the commerce by which he made his fortune. His desire was to
win social position; if baronetcies could be purchased in our time, he
would have given a huge sum to acquire one. But he never distinguished
himself, and one of the reasons was, no doubt, that he married too
soon. I have heard him speak bitterly, and very indiscreetly, of early
marriages; his wife was dead then, but every one knew what he meant.
Rhoda, when one thinks how often a woman is a clog upon a man's
ambition, no wonder they regard us as they do.'

'Of course, women are always retarding one thing or another. But men
are intensely stupid not to have remedied that long ago.'

'He determined that his boys should be gentlemen. Tom, the elder,
followed his wishes exactly; he was remarkably clever, but idleness
spoilt him, and now he has made that ridiculous marriage--the end of
poor Tom. Everard went to Eton, and the school had a remarkable effect
upon him; it made him a furious Radical. Instead of imitating the young
aristocrats he hated and scorned them. There must have been great force
of originality in the boy. Of course I don't know whether any Etonians
of his time preached Radicalism, but it seems unlikely. I think it was
sheer vigour of character, and the strange desire to oppose his father
in everything. From Eton he was of course to pass to Oxford, but at
that stage came practical rebellion. No, said the boy; he wouldn't go
to a university, to fill his head with useless learning; he had made up
his mind to be an engineer. This was an astonishment to every one;
engineering didn't seem at all the thing for him; he had very little
ability in mathematics, and his bent had always been to liberal
studies. But nothing could shake his idea. He had got it into his head
that only some such work as engineering--something of a practical kind,
that called for strength and craftsmanship--was worthy of a man with
his opinions. He would rank with the classes that keep the world going
with their sturdy toil: that was how he spoke. And, after a great
fight, he had his way. He left Eton to study civil engineering.'

Rhoda was listening with an amused smile.

'Then,' pursued her friend, 'came another display of firmness or
obstinacy, whichever you like to call it. He soon found out that he had
made a complete mistake. The studies didn't suit him at all, as others
had foreseen. But he would have worked himself to death rather than
confess his error; none of us knew how he was feeling till long after.
Engineering he had chosen, and an engineer he would be, cost him what
effort it might. His father shouldn't triumph over him. And from the
age of eighteen till nearly thirty he stuck to a profession which I am
sure he loathed. By force of resolve he even got on to it, and reached
a good position with the firm he worked for. Of course his father
wouldn't assist him with money after he came of age; he had to make his
way just like any young man who has no influence.'

'All this puts him in quite another light,' remarked Rhoda.

'Yes, it would be all very well, if there were no vices to add to the
picture. I never experienced such a revulsion of feeling as the day
when I learnt shameful things about Everard. You know, I always
regarded him as a boy, and very much as if he had been my younger
brother; then came the shock--a shock that had a great part in shaping
my life thenceforward. Since, I have thought of him as I have spoken of
him to you--as an illustration of evils we have to combat. A man of the
world would tell you that I grossly magnified trifles; it is very
likely that Everard was on a higher moral level than most men. But I
shall never forgive him for destroying my faith in his honour and
nobility of feeling.'

Rhoda had a puzzled look.

'Perhaps even now you are unintentionally misleading me,' she said. 'I
have supposed him an outrageous profligate.'

'He was vicious and cowardly--I can't say any more.'

'And that was the immediate cause of his father's leaving him poorly
provided for?'

'It had much to do with it, I have no doubt.'

'I see. I imagined that he was cast out of all decent society.'

'If society were really decent, he would have been. It's strange how
completely his Radicalism has disappeared. I believe he never had a
genuine sympathy with the labouring classes. And what's more, I fancy
he had a great deal of his father's desire for command and social
distinction. If he had seen his way to become a great engineer, a
director of vast enterprises, he wouldn't have abandoned his work. An
incredible stubbornness has possibly spoilt his whole life. In a
congenial pursuit he might by this time have attained to something
noteworthy. It's too late now, I fear.'

Rhoda meditated.

'Does he aim at nothing whatever?'

'He won't admit any ambition. He has no society. His friends are nearly
all obscure people, like those you heard him speak of this evening.'

'After all, what ambition should he have?' said Rhoda, with a laugh.
'There's one advantage in being a woman. A woman with brains and will
may hope to distinguish herself in the greatest movement of our
time--that of emancipating her sex. But what can a man do, unless he
has genius?'

'There's the emancipation of the working classes. That is the great
sphere for men; and Everard cares no more for the working classes than
I do.'

'Isn't it enough to be free oneself?'

'You mean that he has task enough in striving to be an honourable man?'

'Perhaps. I hardly know what I meant.'

Miss Barfoot mused, and her face lighted up with a glad thought.

'You are right. It's better to be a woman, in our day. With us is all
the joy of advance, the glory of conquering. Men have only material
progress to think about. But we--we are winning souls, propagating a
new religion, purifying the earth!'

Rhoda nodded thrice.

'My cousin is a fine specimen of a man, after all, in body and mind.
But what a poor, ineffectual creature compared with _you_, Rhoda! I
don't flatter you, dear. I tell you bluntly of your faults and
extravagances. But I am proud of your magnificent independence, proud
of your pride, dear, and of your stainless heart. Thank Heaven we are
women!'

It was rare indeed for Miss Barfoot to be moved to rhapsody. Again
Rhoda nodded, and then they laughed together, with joyous confidence in
themselves and in their cause.




CHAPTER IX

THE SIMPLE FAITH


Seated in the reading-room of a club to which he had newly procured
admission, Everard Barfoot was glancing over the advertisement columns
of a literary paper. His eye fell on an announcement that had a
personal interest to him, and at once he went to the writing-table to
pen a letter.

'DEAR MICKLETHWAITE,--I am back in England, and ought before this to
have written to you. I see you have just published a book with an
alarming title, "A Treatise on Trilinear Co-ordinates." My hearty
congratulations on the completion of such a labour; were you not the
most disinterested of mortals, I would add a hope that it may somehow
benefit you financially. I presume there _are_ people who purchase such
works. But of course the main point with you is to have delivered your
soul on Trilinear Co-ordinates. Shall I run down to Sheffield to see
you, or is there any chance of the holidays bringing you this way? I
have found a cheap flat, poorly furnished, in Bayswater; the man who
let it to me happens to be an engineer, and is absent on Italian
railway work for a year or so. My stay in London won't, I think, be for
longer than six months, but we must see each other and talk over old
times,' etc.

This he addressed to a school at Sheffield. The answer, directed to the
club, reached him in three days.

'My DEAR BARFOOT,--I also am in London; your letter has been forwarded
from the school, which I quitted last Easter. Disinterested or not, I
am happy to tell you that I have got a vastly better appointment. Let
me know when and where to meet you; or if you like, come to these
lodgings of mine. I don't enter upon duties till end of October, and am
at present revelling in mathematical freedom. There's a great deal to
tell.--Sincerely yours,

THOMAS MICKLETHWAITE.'

Having no occupation for his morning, Barfoot went at once to the
obscure little street by Primrose Hill where his friend was lodging. He
reached the house about noon, and, as he had anticipated, found the
mathematician deep in study. Micklethwaite was a man of forty, bent in
the shoulders, sallow, but not otherwise of unhealthy appearance; he
had a merry countenance, a great deal of lank, disorderly hair, and a
beard that reached to the middle of his waistcoat. Everard's
acquaintance with him dated from ten years ago, when Micklethwaite had
acted as his private tutor in mathematics.

The room was a musty little back-parlour on the ground floor.

'Quiet, perfectly quiet,' declared its occupant, 'and that's all I care
for. Two other lodgers in the house; but they go to business every
morning at half-past eight, and are in bed by ten at night. Besides,
it's only temporary. I have great things in view--portentous changes!
I'll tell you all about it presently.'

He insisted, first of all, on hearing a full account of Barfoot's
history since they both met. They had corresponded about twice a year,
but Everard was not fond of letter-writing, and on each occasion gave
only the briefest account of himself. In listening, Micklethwaite
assumed extraordinary positions, the result, presumably, of a need of
physical exercise after hours spent over his work. Now he stretched
himself at full length on the edge of his chair, his arms extended
above him; now he drew up his legs, fixed his feet on the chair, and
locked his hands round his knees; thus perched, he swayed his body
backwards and forwards, till it seemed likely that he would pitch head
foremost on to the floor. Barfoot knew these eccentricities of old, and
paid no attention to them.

'And what is the appointment you have got?' he asked at length,
dismissing his own affairs with impatience.

It was that of mathematical lecturer at a London college.

'I shall have a hundred and fifty a year, and be able to take private
pupils. On two hundred, at least, I can count, and there are
possibilities I won't venture to speak of, because it doesn't do to be
too hopeful. Two hundred a year is a great advance for me.'

'Quite enough, I suppose,' said Everard kindly.

'Not--not enough. I must make a little more somehow.'

'Hollo! Why this spirit of avarice all at once?'

The mathematician gave a shrill, cackling laugh, and rolled upon his
chair.

'I must have more than two hundred. I should be satisfied with _three_
hundred, but I'll take as much more as I can get.'

'My revered tutor, this is shameless. I came to pay my respects to a
philosopher, and I find a sordid worldling. Look at me! I am a man of
the largest needs, spiritual and physical, yet I make my pittance of
four hundred and fifty suffice, and never grumble. Perhaps you aim at
an income equal to my own?'

'I do! What's four hundred and fifty? If you were a man of enterprise
you would double or treble it. I put a high value on money. I wish to
be _rich_!'

'You are either mad or are going to get married.'

Micklethwaite cackled louder than ever.

'I am planning a new algebra for school use. If I'm not much mistaken,
I can turn out something that will supplant all the present books.
Think! If Micklethwaite's Algebra got accepted in all the schools, what
would that mean to Mick? Hundreds a year, my boy--hundreds.'

'I never knew you so indecent.'

'I am renewing my youth. Nay, for the first time I am youthful. I never
had time for it before. At the age of sixteen I began to teach in a
school, and ever since I have pegged away at it, school and private.
Now luck has come to me, and I feel five-and-twenty. When I was really
five-and-twenty, I felt forty.'

'Well, what has that to do with money-making?'

'After Mick's Algebra would follow naturally Mick's Arithmetic, Mick's
Euclid, Mick's Trigonometry. Twenty years hence I should have an income
of thousands--thousands! I would then cease to teach (resign my
professorship--that is to say, for of course I should be professor),
and devote myself to a great work on Probability. Many a man has begun
the best of his life at sixty--the most enjoyable part of it, I mean.'

Barfoot was perplexed. He knew his friend's turn for humorous
exaggeration, but had never once heard him scheme for material
advancement, and evidently this present talk meant something more than
a jest.

'Am I right or not? You are going to get married?'

Micklethwaite glanced at the door, then said in a tone of caution,--

'I don't care to talk about it here. Let us go somewhere and eat
together. I invite you to have dinner with me--or lunch, as I suppose
you would call it, in your aristocratic language.'

'No, you had better have lunch with me. Come to my club.'

'Confound your impudence! Am I not your father in mathematics?'

'Be so good as to put on a decent pair of trousers, and brush your
hair. Ah, here is your Trilinear production. I'll look over it whilst
you make yourself presentable.'

'There's a bad misprint in the Preface. Let me show you--'

'It's all the same to me, my dear fellow.'

But Micklethwaite was not content until he had indicated the error, and
had talked for five minutes about the absurdities that it involved.

'How do you suppose I got the thing published?' he then asked. 'Old
Bennet, the Sheffield headmaster, is security for loss if the book
doesn't pay for itself in two years' time. Kind of him, wasn't it? He
pressed the offer upon me, and I think he's prouder of the book than I
am myself. But it's quite remarkable how kind people are when one is
fortunate. I fancy a great deal of nonsense is talked about the world's
enviousness. Now as soon as it got known that I was coming to this post
in London, people behaved to me with surprising good nature all round.
Old Bennet talked in quite an affectionate strain. "Of course," he
said, "I have long known that you ought to be in a better place than
this; your payment is altogether inadequate; if it had depended upon
_me_, I should long ago have increased it. I truly rejoice that you
have found a more fitting sphere for your remarkable abilities." No; I
maintain that the world is always ready to congratulate you with
sincerity, if you will only give it a chance.'

'Very gracious of you to give it the chance. But, by-the-bye, how did
it come about?'

'Yes, I ought to tell you that. Why, about a year ago, I wrote an
answer to a communication signed by a Big Gun in one of the scientific
papers. It was a question in Probability--you wouldn't understand it.
My answer was printed, and the Big Gun wrote privately to me--a very
flattering letter. That correspondence led to my appointment; the Big
Gun exerted himself on my behalf. The fact is, the world is bursting
with good nature.'

'Obviously. And how long did it take you to write this little book?'

'Oh, only about seven years--the actual composition. I never had much
time to myself, you must remember.'

'You're a good soul, Thomas. Go and equip yourself for civilized
society.'

To the club they repaired on foot. Micklethwaite would talk of anything
but that which his companion most desired to hear.

'There are solemnities in life,' he answered to an impatient question,
'things that can't be spoken of in the highway. When we have eaten, let
us go to your flat, and there I will tell you everything.'

They lunched joyously. The mathematician drank a bottle of excellent
hock, and did corresponding justice to the dishes. His eyes gleamed
with happiness; again he enlarged upon the benevolence of mankind, and
the admirable ordering of the world. From the club they drove to
Bayswater, and made themselves comfortable in Barfoot's flat, which was
very plainly, but sufficiently, furnished. Micklethwaite, cigar in
mouth, threw his legs over the side of the easy-chair in which he was
sitting.

'Now,' he began gravely, 'I don't mind telling you that your conjecture
was right. I _am_ going to be married.'

'Well,' said the other, 'you have reached the age of discretion. I must
suppose that you know what you are about.'

'Yes, I think I do. The story is unexciting. I am not a romantic
person, nor is my future wife. Now, you must know that when I was about
twenty-three years old I fell in love. You never suspected me of that,
I dare say?'

'Why not?'

'Well, I did fall in love. The lady was a clergyman's daughter at
Hereford, where I had a place in a school; she taught the infants in an
elementary school connected with ours; her age was exactly the same as
my own. Now, the remarkable thing was that she took a liking for me,
and when I was scoundrel enough to tell her of my feeling, she didn't
reject me.'

'Scoundrel enough? Why scoundrel?'

'Why? But I hadn't a penny in the world. I lived at the school, and
received a salary of thirty pounds, half of which had to go towards the
support of my mother. What could possibly have been more villainous?
What earthly prospect was there of my being able to marry?'

'Well, grant the monstrosity of it.'

'This lady--a very little lower than the angels--declared that she was
content to wait an indefinite time. She believed in me, and hoped for
my future. Her father--the mother was dead--sanctioned our engagement.
She had three sisters, one of them a governess, another keeping house,
and the third a blind girl. Excellent people, all of them. I was at
their house as often as possible, and they made much of me. It was a
pity, you know, for in those few leisure hours I ought to have been
working like a nigger.'

'Plainly you ought.'

'Fortunately, I left Hereford, and went to a school at Gloucester,
where I had thirty-five pounds. How we gloried over that extra five
pounds! But it's no use going on with the story in this way; it would
take me till to-morrow morning. Seven years went by; we were thirty
years old, and no prospect whatever of our engagement coming to
anything. I had worked pretty hard; I had taken my London degree; but
not a penny had I saved, and all I could spare was still needful to my
mother. It struck me all at once that I had no right to continue the
engagement. On my thirtieth birthday I wrote a letter to Fanny--that is
her name--and begged her to be free. Now, would you have done the same,
or not?'

'Really, I am not imaginative enough to put myself in such a position.
It would need a stupendous effort, at all events.'

'But was there anything gross in the proceeding?'

'The lady took it ill?'

'Not in the sense of being offended. But she said it had caused her
much suffering. She begged me to consider _myself_ free. She would
remain Faithful, and if, in time to come, I cared to write to her
again--After all these years, I can't speak of it without huskiness. It
seemed to me that I had behaved more like a scoundrel than ever. I
thought I had better kill myself, and even planned ways of doing it--I
did indeed. But after all we decided that our engagement should
continue.'

'Of course.'

'You think it natural? Well, the engagement has continued till this
day. A month ago I was forty, so that we have waited for seventeen
years.'

Micklethwaite paused on a note of awe.

'Two of Fanny's sisters are dead; they never married. The blind one
Fanny has long supported, and she will come to live with us. Long, long
ago we had both of us given up thought of marriage. I have never spoken
to any one of the engagement; it was something too absurd, and also too
sacred.'

The smile died from Everard's face, and he sat in thought.

'Now, when are _you_ going to marry?' cried Micklethwaite, with a
revival of his cheerfulness.

'Probably never.'

'Then I think you will neglect a grave duty. Yes. It is the duty of
every man, who has sufficient means, to maintain a wife. The life of
unmarried women is a wretched one; every man who is able ought to save
one of them from that fate.'

'I should like my cousin Mary and her female friends to hear you talk
in that way. They would overwhelm you with scorn.'

'Not sincere scorn, is my belief. Of course I have heard of that kind
of woman. Tell me something about them.'

Barfoot was led on to a broad expression of his views.

'I admire your old-fashioned sentiment, Micklethwaite. It sits well on
you, and you're a fine fellow. But I have much more sympathy with the
new idea that women should think of marriage only as men do--I mean,
not to grow up in the thought that they must marry or be blighted
creatures. My own views are rather extreme, perhaps; strictly, I don't
believe in marriage at all. And I haven't anything like the respect for
women, as women, that you have. You belong to the Ruskin school; and
I--well, perhaps my experience has been unusual, though I don't think
so. You know, by-the-bye, that my relatives consider me a blackguard?'

'That affair you told me about some years ago?'

'Chiefly that. I have a good mind to tell you the true story; I didn't
care to at the time. I accepted the charge of black-guardism; it didn't
matter much. My cousin will never forgive me, though she has an air of
friendliness once more. And I suspect she had told her friend Miss Nunn
all about me. Perhaps to put Miss Nunn on her guard--Heaven knows!'

He laughed merrily.

'Miss Nunn, I dare say, needs no protection against you.'

'I had an odd thought whilst I was there.' Everard leaned his head
back, and half closed his eyes. 'Miss Nunn, I warrant, considers
herself proof against any kind of wooing. She is one of the grandly
severe women; a terror, I imagine, to any young girl at their place who
betrays weak thoughts of matrimony. Now, it's rather a temptation to a
man of my kind. There would be something piquant in making vigorous
love to Miss Nunn, just to prove her sincerity.'

Micklethwaite shook his head.

'Unworthy of you, Barfoot. Of course you couldn't really do such a
thing.'

'But such women really challenge one. If she were rich, I think I could
do it without scruple.'

'You seem to be taking it for granted,' said the mathematician,
smiling, 'that this lady would--would respond to your lovemaking.'

'I confess to you that women have spoilt me. And I am rather resentful
when any one cries out against me for lack of respect to womanhood. I
have been the victim of this groundless veneration for females. Now you
shall hear the story; and bear in mind that you are the only person to
whom I have ever told it. I never tried to defend myself when I was
vilified on all hands. Probably the attempt would have been useless;
and then it would certainly have increased the odium in which I stood.
I think I'll tell cousin Mary the truth some day; it would be good for
her.'

The listener looked uneasy, but curious.

'Well now, I was staying in the summer with some friends of ours at a
little place called Upchurch, on a branch line from Oxford. The people
were well-to-do--Goodall their name--and went in for philanthropy. Mrs.
Goodall always had a lot of Upchurch girls about her, educated and not;
her idea was to civilize one class by means of the other, and to give a
new spirit to both. My cousin Mary was staying at the house whilst I
was there. She had more reasonable views than Mrs. Goodall, but took a
great interest in what was going on.

'Now one of the girls in process of spiritualization was called Amy
Drake. In the ordinary course of things I shouldn't have met her, but
she served in a shop where I went two or three times to get a
newspaper; we talked a little--with absolute propriety on my part, I
assure you--and she knew that I was a friend of the Goodalls. The girl
had no parents, and she was on the point of going to London to live
with a married sister.

'It happened that by the very train which took me back to London, when
my visit was over, this girl also travelled, and alone. I saw her at
Upchurch Station, but we didn't speak, and I got into a smoking
carriage. We had to change at Oxford, and there, as I walked about the
platform, Amy put herself in my way, so that I was obliged to begin
talking with her. This behaviour rather surprised me. I wondered what
Mrs. Goodall would think of it. But perhaps it was a sign of innocent
freedom in the intercourse of men and women. At all events, Amy managed
to get me into the same carriage with herself, and on the way to London
we were alone. You foresee the end of it. At Paddington Station the
girl and I went off together, and she didn't get to her sister's till
the evening.

'Of course I take it for granted that you believe my account of the
matter. Miss Drake was by no means the spiritual young person that Mrs.
Goodall thought her, or hoped to make her; plainly, she was a reprobate
of experience. This, you will say, doesn't alter the fact that I also
behaved like a reprobate. No; from the moralist's point of view I was
to blame. But I had no moral pretentions, and it was too much to expect
that I should rebuke the young woman and preach her a sermon. You admit
that, I dare say?'

The mathematician, frowning uncomfortably, gave a nod of assent.

'Amy was not only a reprobate, but a rascal. She betrayed me to the
people at Upchurch, and, I am quite sure, meant from the first to do
so. Imagine the outcry. I had committed a monstrous crime--had led
astray an innocent maiden, had outraged hospitality--and so on. In
Amy's case there were awkward results. Of course I must marry the girl
forthwith. But of course I was determined to do no such thing. For the
reasons I have explained, I let the storm break upon me. I had been a
fool, to be sure, and couldn't help myself. No one would have believed
my plea--no one would have allowed that the truth was an excuse. I was
abused on all hands. And when, shortly after, my father made his will
and died, doubtless he cut me off with my small annuity on this very
account. My cousin Mary got a good deal of the money that would
otherwise have been mine. The old man had been on rather better terms
with me just before that; in a will that he destroyed I believe he had
treated me handsomely.'

'Well, well,' said Micklethwaite, 'every one knows there are detestable
women to be found. But you oughtn't to let this affect your view of
women in general. What became of the girl?'

'I made her a small allowance for a year and a half. Then her child
died, and the allowance ceased. I know nothing more of her. Probably
she has inveigled some one into marriage.'

'Well, Barfoot,' said the other, rolling about in his chair, 'my
opinion remains the same. You are in debt to some worthy woman to the
extent of half your income. Be quick and find her. It will be better
for you.'

'And do you suppose,' asked Everard, with a smile of indulgence, 'that
I could marry on four hundred and fifty a year.'

'Heavens! Why not?'

'Quite impossible. A wife _might_ be acceptable to me; but marriage
with poverty--I know myself and the world too well for that.'

'Poverty!' screamed the mathematician. 'Four hundred and fifty pounds!'

'Grinding poverty--for married people.'

Micklethwaite burst into indignant eloquence, and Everard sat listening
with the restrained smile on his lips.




CHAPTER X

FIRST PRINCIPLES


Having allowed exactly a week to go by, Everard Barfoot made use of his
cousin's permission, and called upon her at nine in the evening. Miss
Barfoot's dinner-hour was seven o'clock; she and Rhoda, when alone,
rarely sat for more than half an hour at table, and in this summer
season they often went out together at sunset to enjoy a walk along the
river. This evening they had returned only a few minutes before
Everard's ring sounded at the door. Miss Barfoot (they were just
entering the library) looked at her friend and smiled.

'I shouldn't wonder if that is the young man. Very flattering if he has
come again so soon.'

The visitor was in mirthful humour, and met with a reception of
corresponding tone. He remarked at once that Miss Nunn had a much
pleasanter aspect than a week ago; her smile was ready and agreeable;
she sat in a sociable attitude and answered a jesting triviality with
indulgence.

'One of my reasons for coming to-day,' said Everard, 'was to tell you a
remarkable story. It connects'--he addressed his cousin--'with our talk
about the matrimonial disasters of those two friends of mine. Do you
remember the name of Micklethwaite--a man who used to cram me with
mathematics? I thought you would. He is on the point of marrying, and
his engagement has lasted just seventeen years.'

'The wisest of your friends, I should say.'

'An excellent fellow. He is forty, and the lady the same. An
astonishing case of constancy.'

'And how is it likely to turn out?'

'I can't predict, as the lady is unknown to me. But,' he added with
facetious gravity, 'I think it likely that they are tolerably well
acquainted with each other. Nothing but sheer poverty has kept them
apart. Pathetic, don't you think? I have a theory that when an
engagement has lasted ten years, with constancy on both sides, and
poverty still prevents marriage, the State ought to make provision for
a man in some way, according to his social standing. When one thinks of
it, a whole socialistic system lies in that suggestion.'

'If,' remarked Rhoda, 'it were first provided that no marriage should
take place until _after_ a ten years' engagement.'

'Yes,' Barfoot assented, in his smoothest and most graceful tone. 'That
completes the system. Unless you like to add that no engagement is
permitted except between people who have passed a certain examination;
equivalent, let us say, to that which confers a university degree.'

'Admirable. And no marriage, except where both, for the whole
decennium, have earned their living by work that the State recognizes.'

'How would that affect Mr. Micklethwaite's betrothed?' asked Miss
Barfoot.

'I believe she has supported herself all along by teaching.'

'Of course!' exclaimed the other impatiently. 'And more likely than
not, with loathing of her occupation. The usual kind of drudgery, was
it?'

'After all, there must be some one to teach children to read and write.'

'Yes; but people who are thoroughly well trained for the task, and who
take a pleasure in it. This lady may be an exception; but I picture her
as having spent a lifetime of uncongenial toil, longing miserably for
the day when poor Mr. Micklethwaite was able to offer her a home.
That's the ordinary teacher-woman, and we must abolish her altogether.'

'How are you to do that?' inquired Everard suavely. 'The average man
labours that he may be able to marry, and the average woman certainly
has the same end in view. Are female teachers to be vowed to celibacy?'

'Nothing of the kind. But girls are to be brought up to a calling in
life, just as men are. It's because they have no calling that, when
need comes, they all offer themselves as teachers. They undertake one
of the most difficult and arduous pursuits as if it were as simple as
washing up dishes. We can't earn money in any other way, but we can
teach children! A man only becomes a schoolmaster or tutor when he has
gone through laborious preparation--anything but wise or adequate, of
course, but still conscious preparation; and only a very few men,
comparatively, choose that line of work. Women must have just as wide a
choice.'

'That's plausible, cousin Mary. But remember that when a man chooses
his calling he chooses it for life. A girl cannot but remember that if
she marries her calling at once changes. The old business is thrown
aside--henceforth profitless.'

'No. Not henceforth profitless! There's the very point I insist upon.
So far is it from profitless, that it has made her a wholly different
woman from what she would otherwise have been. Instead of a moping,
mawkish creature, with--in most instances--a very unhealthy mind, she
is a complete human being. She stands on an equality with the man. He
can't despise her as he now does.'

'Very good,' assented Everard, observing Miss Nunn's satisfied smile.
'I like that view very much. But what about the great number of girls
who are claimed by domestic duties? Do you abandon them, with a
helpless sigh, to be moping and mawkish and unhealthy?'

'In the first place, there needn't be a great number of unmarried women
claimed by such duties. Most of those you are thinking of are not
fulfilling a duty at all; they are only pottering about the house,
