because they have nothing better to do. And when the whole course of
female education is altered; when girls are trained as a matter of
course to some definite pursuit; then those who really are obliged to
remain at home will do their duty there in quite a different spirit.
Home work will be their serious business, instead of a disagreeable
drudgery, or a way of getting through the time till marriage offers. I
would have no girl, however wealthy her parent, grow up without a
profession. There should be no such thing as a class of females
vulgarized by the necessity of finding daily amusement.'

'Nor of males either, of course,' put in Everard, stroking his beard.

'Nor of males either, cousin Everard.'

'You thoroughly approve all this, Miss Nunn?'

'Oh yes. But I go further. I would have girls taught that marriage is a
thing to be avoided rather than hoped for. I would teach them that for
the majority of women marriage means disgrace.'

'Ah! Now do let me understand you. Why does it mean disgrace?'

'Because the majority of men are without sense of honour. To be bound
to them in wedlock is shame and misery.'

Everard's eyelids drooped, and he did not speak for a moment.

'And you seriously think, Miss Nunn, that by persuading as many woman
as possible to abstain from marriage you will improve the character of
men?'

'I have no hope of sudden results, Mr. Barfoot. I should like to save
as many as possible of the women now living from a life of dishonour;
but the spirit of our work looks to the future. When _all_ women, high
and low alike, are trained to self-respect, then men will regard them
in a different light, and marriage may be honourable to both.'

Again Everard was silent, and seemingly impressed.

'We'll go on with this discussion another time,' said Miss Barfoot,
with cheerful interruption. 'Everard, do you know Somerset at all?'

'Never was in that part of England.'

'Miss Nunn is going to take her holiday at Cheddar and we have been
looking over some photographs of that district taken by her brother.'

From the table she reached a scrapbook, and Everard turned it over with
interest. The views were evidently made by an amateur, but in general
had no serious faults. Cheddar cliffs were represented in several
aspects.

'I had no idea the scenery was so fine. Cheddar cheese has quite
overshadowed the hills in my imagination. This might be a bit of
Cumberland, or of the Highlands.'

'It was my playground when I was a child,' said Rhoda.

'You were born at Cheddar?'

'No; at Axbridge, a little place not far off. But I had an uncle at
Cheddar, a farmer, and very often stayed with him. My brother is
farming there now.'

'Axbridge? Here is a view of the market-place. What a delightful old
town!'

'One of the sleepiest spots in England, I should say. The railway goes
through it now, but hasn't made the slightest difference. Nobody pulls
down or builds; nobody opens a new shop; nobody thinks of extending his
trade. A delicious place!'

'But surely you find no pleasure in that kind of thing, Miss Nunn?'

'Oh yes--at holiday time. I shall doze there for a fortnight, and
forget all about the "so-called nineteenth century."'

'I can hardly believe it. There will be a disgraceful marriage at this
beautiful old church, and the sight of it will exasperate you.'

Rhoda laughed gaily.

'Oh, it will be a marriage of the golden age! Perhaps I shall remember
the bride when she was a little girl; and I shall give her a kiss, and
pat her on the rosy cheek, and wish her joy. And the bridegroom will be
such a good-hearted simpleton, unable to pronounce _f_ and _s_. I don't
mind that sort of marriage a bit!'

The listeners were both regarding her--Miss Barfoot with an
affectionate smile, Everard with a puzzled, searching look, ending in
amusement.

'I must run down into that country some day,' said the latter.

He did not stay much longer, but left only because he feared to burden
the ladies with too much of his company.

Again a week passed, and the same evening found Barfoot approaching the
house in Queen's Road. To his great annoyance he learnt that Miss
Barfoot was not at home; she had dined, but afterwards had gone out. He
did not venture to ask for Miss Nunn, and was moving disappointedly
away, when Rhoda herself, returning from a walk, came up to the door.
She offered her hand gravely, but with friendliness.

'Miss Barfoot, I am sorry to say, has gone to visit one of our girls
who is ill. But I think she will very soon be back. Will you come in?'

'Gladly. I had so counted on an hour's talk.'

Rhoda led him to the drawing-room, excused herself for a few moments,
and came back in her ordinary evening dress. Barfoot noticed that her
hair was much more becomingly arranged than when he first saw her; so
it had been on the last occasion, but for some reason its appearance
attracted his eyes this evening. He scrutinized her, at discreet
intervals, from head to foot. To Everard, nothing female was alien;
woman, merely as woman, interested him profoundly. And this example of
her sex had excited his curiosity in no common degree. His concern with
her was purely intellectual; she had no sensual attraction for him, but
he longed to see further into her mind, to probe the sincerity of the
motives she professed, to understand her mechanism, her process of
growth. Hitherto he had enjoyed no opportunity of studying this type.
For his cousin was a very different person; by habit he regarded her as
old, whereas Miss Nunn, in spite of her thirty years, could not
possibly be considered past youth.

He enjoyed her air of equality; she sat down with him as a male
acquaintance might have done, and he felt sure that her behaviour would
be the same under any circumstances. He delighted in the frankness of
her speech; it was doubtful whether she regarded any subject as
improper for discussion between mature and serious people. Part cause
of this, perhaps, was her calm consciousness that she had not a
beautiful face. No, it was not beautiful; yet even at the first meeting
it did not repel him. Studying her features, he saw how fine was their
expression. The prominent forehead, with its little unevenness that
meant brains; the straight eyebrows, strongly marked, with deep
vertical furrows generally drawn between them; the chestnut-brown eyes,
with long lashes; the high-bridged nose, thin and delicate; the
intellectual lips, a protrusion of the lower one, though very slight,
marking itself when he caught her profile; the big, strong chin; the
shapely neck--why, after all, it was a kind of beauty. The head might
have been sculptured with fine effect. And she had a well-built frame.
He observed her strong wrists, with exquisite vein-tracings on the pure
white. Probably her constitution was very sound; she had good teeth,
and a healthy brownish complexion.

With reference to the sick girl whom Miss Barfoot was visiting, Everard
began what was practically a resumption of their last talk.

'Have you a formal society, with rules and so on?'

'Oh no; nothing of the kind.'

'But you of course select the girls whom you instruct or employ?'

'Very carefully.'

'How I should like to see them all!--I mean,' he added, with a laugh,
'it would be so very interesting. The truth is, my sympathies are
strongly with you in much of what you said the other day about women
and marriage. We regard the matter from different points of view, but
our ends are the same.'

Rhoda moved her eyebrows, and asked calmly,--

'Are you serious?'

'Perfectly. You are absorbed in your present work, that of
strengthening women's minds and character; for the final issue of this
you can't care much. But to me that is the practical interest. In my
mind, you are working for the happiness of men.'

'Indeed?' escaped Rhoda's lips, which had curled in irony.

'Don't misunderstand me. I am not speaking cynically or trivially. The
gain of women is also the gain of men. You are bitter against the
average man for his low morality; but that fault, on the whole, is
directly traceable to the ignobleness of women. Think, and you will
grant me this.'

'I see what you mean. Men have themselves to thank for it.'

'Assuredly they have. I say that I am on your side. Our civilization in
this point has always been absurdly defective. Men have kept women at a
barbarous stage of development, and then complain that they are
barbarous. In the same way society does its best to create a criminal
class, and then rages against the criminals. But, you see, I am one of
the men, and an impatient one too. The mass of women I see about me are
so contemptible that, in my haste, I use unjust language. Put yourself
in the man's place. Say that there are a million or so of us very
intelligent and highly educated. Well, the women of corresponding mind
number perhaps a few thousands. The vast majority of men must make a
marriage that is doomed to be a dismal failure. We fall in love it is
true; but do we really deceive ourselves about the future? A very young
man may; why, we know of very young men who are so frantic as to marry
girls of the working class--mere lumps of human flesh. But most of us
know that our marriage is a _pis aller_. At first we are sad about it;
then we grow cynical, and snap our fingers at moral obligation.'

'Making a bad case very much worse, instead of bravely bettering it.'

'Yes, but human nature is human nature. I am only urging to you the
case of average intelligent men. As likely as not--so preposterous are
our conventions--you have never heard it put honestly. I tell you the
simple truth when I say that more than half these men regard their
wives with active disgust. They will do anything to be relieved of the
sight of them for as many hours as possible at a time. If circumstances
allowed, wives would be abandoned very often indeed.'

Rhoda laughed.

'You regret that it isn't done?'

'I prefer to say that I approve it when it is done without disregard of
common humanity. There's my friend Orchard. With him it was suicide or
freedom from his hateful wife. Most happily, he was able to make
provision for her and the children, and had strength to break his
bonds. If he had left them to starve, I should have _understood_ it,
but couldn't have approved it. There are men who might follow his
example, but prefer to put up with a life of torture. Well, they _do_
prefer it, you see. I may think that they are foolishly weak, but I can
only recognize that they make a choice between two forms of suffering.
They have tender consciences; the thought of desertion is too painful
to them. And in a great number of cases, mere considerations of money
and the like keep a man bound. But conscience and habit--detestable
habit--and fear of public opinion generally hold him.'

'All this is very interesting,' said Rhoda, with grave irony.
'By-the-bye, under the head of detestable habit you would put love of
children?'

Barfoot hesitated.

'That's a motive I oughtn't to have left out. Yet I believe, for most
men, it is represented by conscience. The love of children would not
generally, in itself, be strong enough to outweigh matrimonial
wretchedness. Many an intelligent and kind-hearted man has been driven
from his wife notwithstanding thought for his children. He provides for
them as well as he can--but, and even for their sakes, he must save
himself.'

The expression of Rhoda's countenance suddenly changed. An extreme
mobility of facial muscles was one of the things in her that held
Everard's attention.

'There's something in your way of putting it that I don't like,' she
said, with much frankness; 'but of course I agree with you in the
facts. I am convinced that most marriages are hateful, from every point
of view. But there will be no improvement until women have revolted
against marriage, from a reasonable conviction of its hatefulness.'

'I wish you all success--most sincerely I do.'

He paused, looked about the room, and stroked his ear. Then, in a grave
tone,--

'My own ideal of marriage involves perfect freedom on both sides. Of
course it could only be realized where conditions are favourable;
poverty and other wretched things force us so often to sin against our
best beliefs. But there are plenty of people who might marry on these
ideal terms. Perfect freedom, sanctioned by the sense of intelligent
society, would abolish most of the evils we have in mind. But women
must first be civilized; you are quite right in that.'

The door opened, and Miss Barfoot came in. She glanced from one to the
other, and without speaking gave her hand to Everard.

'How is your patient?' he asked.

'A little better, I think. It is nothing dangerous. Here's a letter
from your brother Tom. Perhaps I had better read it at once; there may
be news you would like to hear.'

She sat down and broke the envelope. Whilst she was reading the letter
to herself, Rhoda quietly left the room.

'Yes, there is news,' said Miss Barfoot presently, 'and of a
disagreeable kind. A few weeks ago--before writing, that is--he was
thrown off a horse and had a rib fractured.'

'Oh? How is he going on?'

'Getting right again, he says. And they are coming back to England; his
wife's consumptive symptoms have disappeared, of course, and she is
very impatient to leave Madeira. It is to be hoped she will allow poor
Tom time to get his rib set. Probably that consideration doesn't weigh
much with her. He says that he is writing to you by the same mail.'

'Poor old fellow!' said Everard, with feeling. 'Does he complain about
his wife?'

'He never has done till now, but there's a sentence here that reads
doubtfully. "Muriel," he says, "has been terribly upset about my
accident. I can't persuade her that I didn't get thrown on purpose; yet
I assure you I didn't."'

Everard laughed.

'If old Tom becomes ironical, he must be hard driven. I have no great
longing to meet Mrs. Thomas.'

'She's a silly and a vulgar woman. But I told him that in plain terms
before he married. It says much for his good nature that he remains so
friendly with me. Read the letter, Everard.'

He did so.

'H'm--very kind things about me. Good old Tom! Why don't I marry? Well,
now, one would have thought that his own experience--'

Miss Barfoot began to talk about something else. Before very long Rhoda
came back, and in the conversation that followed it was mentioned that
she would leave for her holiday in two days.

'I have been reading about Cheddar,' exclaimed Everard, with animation.
'There's a flower grows among the rocks called the Cheddar pink. Do you
know it?'

'Oh, very well,' Rhoda answered. 'I'll bring you some specimens.'

'Will you? That's very kind.'

'Bring _me_ a genuine pound or two of the cheese, Rhoda,' requested
Miss Barfoot gaily.

'I will. What they sell in the shops there is all sham, Mr.
Barfoot--like so much else in this world.'

'I care nothing about the cheese. That's all very well for a
matter-of-fact person like cousin Mary, but _I_ have a strong vein of
poetry; you must have noticed it?'

When they shook hands,--

'You will really bring me the flowers?' Everard said in a voice
sensibly softened.

'I will make a note of it,' was the reassuring answer.




CHAPTER XI

AT NATURE'S BIDDING


The sick girl whom Miss Barfoot had been to see was Monica Madden.

With strange suddenness, after several weeks of steady application to
her work, in a cheerful spirit which at times rose to gaiety, Monica
became dull, remiss, unhappy; then violent headaches attacked her, and
one morning she declared herself unable to rise. Mildred Vesper went to
Great Portland Street at the usual hour, and informed Miss Barfoot of
her companion's illness. A doctor was summoned; to him it seemed
probable that the girl was suffering from consequences of overstrain at
her old employment; there was nervous collapse, hysteria, general
disorder of the system. Had the patient any mental disquietude? Was
trouble of any kind (the doctor smiled) weighing upon her? Miss
Barfoot, unable to answer these questions, held private colloquy with
Mildred; but the latter, though she pondered a good deal with
corrugated brows, could furnish no information.

In a day or two Monica was removed to her sister's lodgings at Lavender
Hill. Mrs. Conisbee managed to put a room at her disposal, and Virginia
tended her. Thither Miss Barfoot went on the evening when Everard found
her away; she and Virginia, talking together after being with the
invalid for a quarter of an hour, agreed that there was considerable
improvement, but felt a like uneasiness regarding Monica's state of
mind.

'Do you think,' asked the visitor, 'that she regrets the step I
persuaded her to take?'

'Oh, I _can't_ think that! She has been so delighted with her progress
each time I have seen her. No, I feel sure it's only the results of
what she suffered at Walworth Road. In a very short time we shall have
her at work again, and brighter than ever.'

Miss Barfoot was not convinced. After Everard's departure that evening
she talked of the matter with Rhoda.

'I'm afraid,' said Miss Nunn, 'that Monica is rather a silly girl. She
doesn't know her own mind. If this kind of thing is repeated, we had
better send her back to the country.'

'To shop work again?'

'It might be better.'

'Oh, I don't like the thought of that.'

Rhoda had one of her fits of wrathful eloquence.

'Now could one have a better instance than this Madden family of the
crime that middle-class parents commit when they allow their girls to
go without rational training? Of course I know that Monica was only a
little child when they were left orphans; but her sisters had already
grown up into uselessness, and their example has been harmful to her
all along. Her guardians dealt with her absurdly; they made her half a
lady and half a shop-girl. I don't think she'll ever be good for much.
And the elder ones will go on just keeping themselves alive; you can
see that. They'll never start the school that there's so much talk of.
That poor, helpless, foolish Virginia, alone there in her miserable
lodging! How can we hope that any one will take her as a companion? And
yet they are capitalists; eight hundred pounds between them. Think what
capable women might do with eight hundred pounds.'

'I am really afraid to urge them to meddle with the investments.'

'Of course; so am I. One is afraid to do or propose anything. Virginia
is starving, _must_ be starving. Poor creature! I can never forget how
her eyes shone when I put that joint of meat before her.'

'I do, do wish,' sighed Miss Barfoot, with a pained smile, 'that I knew
some honest man who would be likely to fall in love with little Monica!
In spite of you, my dear, I would devote myself to making the match.
But there's no one.'

'Oh, I would help,' laughed Rhoda, not unkindly. 'She's fit for nothing
else, I'm afraid. We mustn't look for any kind of heroism in Monica.'

Less than half an hour after Miss Barfoot had left the house at
Lavender Hill, Mildred Vesper made a call there. It was about half-past
nine; the invalid, after sitting up since midday, had gone to bed, but
could not sleep. Summoned to the house-door, Virginia acquainted Miss
Vesper with the state of affairs.

'I think you might see her for a few minutes.'

'I should like to, if you please, Miss Madden,' replied Mildred, who
had a rather uneasy look.

She went upstairs and entered the bedroom, where a lamp was burning. At
the sight of her friend Monica showed much satisfaction; they kissed
each other affectionately.

'Good old girl! I had made up my mind to come back tomorrow, or at all
events the day after. It's so frightfully dull here. Oh, and I wanted
to know if anything--any letter--had come for me.'

'That's just why I came to see you to-night.'

Mildred took a letter from her pocket, and half averted her face as she
handed it.

'It's nothing particular,' said Monica, putting it away under her
pillow. 'Thank you, dear.'

But her cheeks had become hot, and she trembled.

'Monica--'

'Well?'

'You wouldn't care to tell me about--anything? You don't think it would
make your mind easier?'

For a minute Monica lay back, gazing at the wall, then she looked round
quickly, with a shamefaced laugh.

'It's very silly of me not to have told you long before this. But
you're so sensible; I was afraid. I'll tell you everything. Not now,
but as soon as I get to Rutland Street. I shall come to-morrow.'

'Do you think you can? You look dreadfully bad still.'

'I shan't get any better here,' replied the invalid in a whisper. 'Poor
Virgie does depress me so. She doesn't understand that I can't bear to
hear her repeating the kind of things she has heard from Miss Barfoot
and Miss Nunn. She tries so hard to look forward hopefully--but I
_know_ she is miserable, and it makes me more miserable still. I
oughtn't to have left you; I should have been all right in a day or
two, with you to help me. You don't make-believe, Milly; it's all real
and natural good spirits. It has done me good only to see your dear old
face.'

'Oh, you're a flatterer. And do you really feel better?'

'Very much better. I shall go to sleep very soon.'

The visitor took her leave. When, a few minutes after, Monica had
bidden good-night to her sister (requesting that the lamp might be
left), she read what Mildred had brought.

'MY DEAREST MONICA,'--the missive began--'Why have you not written
before this? I have been dreadfully uneasy ever since receiving your
last letter. Your headache soon went away, I hope? Why haven't you made
another appointment? It is all I can do to keep from breaking my
promise and coming to ask about you. Write at once, I implore you, my
dearest. It's no use telling me that I must not use these words of
affection; they come to my lips and to my pen irresistibly. You know so
well that I love you with all my heart and soul; I can't address you
like I did when we first corresponded. My darling! My dear, sweet,
beautiful little girl--'

Four close pages of this, with scarce room at the end for 'E.W.' When
she had gone through it, Monica turned her face upon the pillow and lay
so for a long time. A clock in the house struck eleven; this roused
her, and she slipped out of the bed to hide the letter in her
dress-pocket. Not long after she was asleep.

The next day, on returning from her work and opening the sitting-room
door, Mildred Vesper was greeted with a merry laugh. Monica had been
here since three o'clock, and had made tea in readiness for her
friend's arrival. She looked very white, but her eyes gleamed with
pleasure, and she moved about the room as actively as before.

'Virgie came with me, but she wouldn't stay. She says she has a most
important letter to write to Alice--about the school, of course. Oh,
that school! I do wish they could make up their minds. I've told them
they may have all my money, if they like.'

'Have you? I should like the sensation of offering hundreds of pounds
to some one. It must give a strange feeling of dignity and importance.'

'Oh, only _two_ hundred! A wretched little sum.'

'You are a person of large ideas, as I have often told you. Where did
you get them, I wonder?'

'Don't put on that face! It's the one I like least of all your many
faces. It's suspicious.'

Mildred went to take off her things, and was quickly at the tea-table.
She had a somewhat graver look than usual, and chose rather to listen
than talk.

Not long after tea, when there had been a long and unnatural silence,
Mildred making pretence of absorption in a 'Treasury' and her companion
standing at the window, whence she threw back furtive glances, the
thunder of a postman's knock downstairs caused both of them to start,
and look at each other in a conscience-stricken way.

'That may be for me,' said Monica, stepping to the door. 'I'll go and
look.'

Her conjecture was right. Another letter from Widdowson, still more
alarmed and vehement than the last. She read it rapidly on the
staircase, and entered the room with sheet and envelope squeezed
together in her hand.

'I'm going to tell you all about this, Milly.'

The other nodded and assumed an attitude of sober attention. In
relating her story, Monica moved hither and thither; now playing with
objects on the mantlepiece, now standing in the middle of the floor,
hands locked nervously behind her. Throughout, her manner was that of
defence; she seemed doubtful of herself, and anxious to represent the
case as favourably as possible; not for a moment had her voice the ring
of courageous passion, nor the softness of tender feeling. The
narrative hung together but awkwardly, and in truth gave a very
indistinct notion of how she had comported herself at the various
stages of the irregular courtship. Her behaviour had been marked by far
more delicacy and scruple than she succeeded in representing. Painfully
conscious of this, she exclaimed at length,--

'I see your opinion of me has suffered. You don't like this story. You
wonder how I could do such things.'

'Well, dear, I certainly wonder how you could begin,' Mildred made
answer, with her natural directness, but gently. 'Afterwards, of
course, it was different. When you had once got to be sure that he was
a gentleman--'

'I was sure of that so soon,' exclaimed Monica, her cheeks still red.
'You will understand it much better when you have seen him.'

'You wish me to?'

'I am going to write now, and say that I will marry him.'

They looked long at each other.

'You are--really?'

'Yes. I made up my mind last night.'

'But, Monica--you mustn't mind my speaking plainly--I don't think you
love him.'

'Yes, I love him well enough to feel that I am doing right in marrying
him.' She sat down by the table, and propped her head on her hand. 'He
loves me; I can't doubt that. If you could read his letters, you would
see how strong his feeling is.'

She shook with the cold induced by excitement; her voice was at moments
all but choked.

'But, putting love aside,' went on the other, very gravely, 'what do
you really know of Mr. Widdowson? Nothing whatever but what he has told
you himself. Of course you will let your friends make inquiries for
you?'

'Yes. I shall tell my sisters, and no doubt they will go to Miss Nunn
at once. I don't want to do anything rash. But it will be all right--I
mean, he has told me the truth about everything. You would be sure of
that if you knew him.'

Mildred, with hands before her on the table, made the tips of her
fingers meet. Her lips were drawn in; her eyes seemed looking for
something minute on the cloth.

'You know,' she said at length, 'I suspected what was going on. I
couldn't help.'

'Of course you couldn't.'

'Naturally I thought it was some one whose acquaintance you had made at
the shop.'

'How _could_ I think of marrying any one of that kind?'

'I should have been grieved.'

'You may believe me, Milly; Mr. Widdowson is a man you will respect and
like as soon as you know him. He couldn't have behaved to me with more
delicacy. Not a word from him, spoken or written, has ever pained
me--except that he tells me he suffers so dreadfully, and of course I
can't hear that without pain.'

'To respect, and even to like, a man, isn't at all the same as loving
him.'

'I said _you_ would respect and like him,' exclaimed Monica, with
humorous impatience. 'I don't want _you_ to love him.'

Mildred laughed, with constraint.

'I never loved any one yet, dear, and it's very unlikely I ever shall.
But I think I know the signs of the feeling.'

Monica came behind her, and leaned upon her shoulder.

'He loves me so much that he has made me think I _must_ marry him. And
I am glad of it. I'm not like you, Milly; I can't be contented with
this life. Miss Barfoot and Miss Nunn are very sensible and good
people, and I admire them very much, but I _can't_ go their way. It
seems to me that it would be dreadful, dreadful, to live one's life
alone. Don't turn round and snap at me; I want to tell you the truth
whilst you can't see me. Whenever I think of Alice and Virginia, I am
frightened; I had rather, oh, far rather, kill myself than live such a
life at their age. You can't imagine how miserable they are, really.
And I have the same nature as theirs, you know. Compared with you and
Miss Haven I'm very weak and childish.'

After drumming on the table for a moment, with wrinkled brows, Mildred
made grave response.

'You must let _me_ tell the truth as well. I think you're going to
marry with altogether wrong ideas. I think you'll do an injustice to
Mr. Widdowson. You will marry him for a comfortable home--that's what
it amounts to. And you'll repent it bitterly some day--you'll repent.'

Monica raised herself and stood apart.

'For one thing,' pursued Mildred, with nervous earnestness, 'he's too
old. Your habits and his won't suit.'

'He has assured me that I shall live exactly the kind of life I please.
And that will be what _he_ pleases. I feel his kindness to me very
much, and I shall do my utmost to repay him.'

'That's a very nice spirit; but I believe married life is no easy thing
even when the people are well matched. I have heard the most dreadful
stories of quarrelling and all sorts of unhappiness between people I
thought safe from any such dangers. You _may_ be fortunate; I only say
that the chances are very much against it, marrying from such motives
as you confess.'

Monica drew herself up.

'I haven't confessed any motive to be ashamed of, Milly.'

'You say you have decided to marry now because you are afraid of never
having another chance.'

'No; that's turning it very unkindly. I only said that _after_ I had
told you that I did love him. And I do love him. He has made me love
him.'

'Then I have no right to say any more. I can only wish you happiness.'

Mildred heaved a sigh, and pretended to give her attention to Maunder.

After waiting irresolutely for some minutes, Monica looked for
notepaper, and took it, together with her inkstand, into the bedroom.
She was absent half an hour. On her return there was a stamped letter
in her hand.

'It is going, Milly.'

'Very well, dear. I have nothing more to say.'

'You give me up for lost. We shall see.'

It was spoken light-heartedly. Again she left the room, put on her
out-of-door things, and went to post the letter. By this time she began
to feel the results of exertion and excitement; headache and tremulous
failing of her strength obliged her to go to bed almost as soon as she
returned. Mildred waited upon her with undiminished kindness.

'It's all right,' Monica murmured, as her head sank on the pillow. 'I
feel so relieved and so glad--so happy--now I have done it.'

'Good-night, dear,' replied the other, with a kiss, and went back to
her semblance of reading.

Two days later Monica called unexpectedly at Mrs. Conisbee's. Being
told by that worthy woman that Miss Madden was at home, she ran
upstairs and tapped at the door. Virginia's voice inquired hurriedly
who was there, and on Monica's announcing herself there followed a
startled exclamation.

'Just a minute, my love! Only a minute.'

When the door opened Monica was surprised by a disorder in her sister's
appearance. Virginia had flushed cheeks, curiously vague eyes, and hair
ruffled as if she had just risen from a nap. She began to talk in a
hurried, disconnected way, trying to explain that she had not been
quite well, and was not yet properly dressed.

'What a strange smell!' Monica exclaimed, looking about the room. 'It's
like brandy.'

'You notice it? I have--I was obliged to get--to ask Mrs. Conisbee
for--I don't want to alarm you, dear, but I felt rather faint. Indeed,
I thought I should have a fainting fit. I was obliged to call Mrs.
Conisbee--But don't think anything about it. It's all over. The weather
is very trying--'

She laughed nervously and began to pat Monica's hand. The girl was not
quite satisfied, and pressed many questions, but in the end she
accepted Virginia's assurances that nothing serious had happened. Then
her own business occupied her; she sat down, and said with a smile,--

'I have brought you astonishing news. If you didn't faint before you'll
be very likely to do so now.'

Her sister exhibited fresh agitation, and begged not to be kept in
suspense.

'My nerves are in a shocking state to-day. It _must_ be the weather.
What _can_ you have to tell me, Monica?'

'I think I shan't need to go on with typewriting.'

'Why? What are you going to do, child?' the other asked sharply.

'Virgie--I am going to be married.'

The shock was a severe one. Virginia's hands fell, her eyes started,
her mouth opened; she became the colour of clay, even her lips losing
for the moment all their colour.

'Married?' she at length gasped. 'Who--who is it?'

'Some one you have never heard of. His name is Mr. Edmund Widdowson. He
is very well off, and has a house at Herne Hill.'

'A private gentleman?'

'Yes. He used to be in business, but is retired. Now, I am not going to
tell you much more about him until you have made his acquaintance.
Don't ask a lot of questions. You are to come with me this afternoon to
his house. He lives alone, but a relative of his, his sister-in-law, is
going to be with him to meet us.'

'Oh, but it's so sudden! I can't go to pay a call like that at a
moment's notice. Impossible, darling! What _does_ it all mean? You are
going to be married, Monica? I can't understand it. I can't realize it.
Who is this gentleman? How long--'

'No; you won't get me to tell you more than I have done, till you have
seen him.'

'But what _have_ you told me? I couldn't grasp it. I am quite confused.
Mr.--what was the name?'

It took half an hour to familiarize Virginia with the simple fact. When
she was convinced of its truth, a paroxysm of delight appeared in her.
She laughed, uttered cries of joy, even clapped her hands.

'Monica to be married! A private gentleman--a large fortune! My
darling, how shall I ever believe it? Yet I felt so sure that the day
would come. What _will_ Alice say? And Rhoda Nunn? Have you--have you
ventured to tell her?'

'No, that I haven't. I want you to do that You shall go and see them
to-morrow, as it's Sunday.'

'Oh, the delight! Alice won't be able to contain herself. We always
said the day would come.'

'You won't have any more anxieties, Virgie. You can take the school or
not, as you like. Mr. Widdowson--'

'Oh, my dear,' interposed Virginia, with sudden dignity, 'we shall
certainly open the school. We have made up our minds; that is to be our
life's work. It is far, far more than a mere means of subsistence. But
perhaps we shall not need to hurry. Everything can be matured at our
leisure. If you would only just tell me, darling, when you were first
introduced?'

Monica laughed gaily, and refused to explain. It was time for Virginia
to make herself ready, and here arose a new perturbation; what had she
suitable for wear under such circumstances? Monica had decked herself a
little, and helped the other to make the best of her narrow resources.
At four o'clock they set out.




CHAPTER XII

WEDDINGS


When they reached the house at Herne Hill the sisters were both in a
state of nervous tremor. Monica had only the vaguest idea of the kind
of person Mrs. Luke Widdowson would prove to be, and Virginia seemed to
herself to be walking in a dream.

'Have you been here often?' whispered the latter, as soon as they came
in view of the place. Its aspect delighted her, but the conflict of her
emotions was so disturbing that she had to pause and seek the support
of her sister's arm.

'I've never been inside,' Monica answered indistinctly. 'Come; we shall
be unpunctual.'

'I do wish you would tell me, dear--'

'I can't talk, Virgie. Try and keep quiet, and behave as if it were all
quite natural.'

This was altogether beyond Virginia's power. It happened most luckily,
though greatly to Widdowson's annoyance, that the sister-in-law, Mrs.
Luke Widdowson, arrived nearly half an hour later than the time she had
appointed. Led by the servant into a comfortable drawing-room, the
visitors were received by the master of the house alone; with a grim
smile, the result of his embarrassment, with profuse apologies and a
courtesy altogether excessive, Widdowson did his best to put them at
their ease--of course with small result. The sisters side by side on a
settee at one end of the room, and the host seated far away from them,
they talked with scarcely any understanding of what was said on either
side--the weather and the vastness of London serving as topics--until
of a sudden the door was thrown open, and there appeared a person of
such imposing presence that Virginia gave a start and Monica gazed in
painful fascination. Mrs. Luke was a tall and portly woman in the prime
of life, with rather a high colour; her features were handsome, but
without much refinement, their expression a condescending good-humour.
Her mourning garb, if mourning it could be called, represented an
extreme of the prevailing fashion; its glint and rustle inspired awe in
the female observer. A moment ago the drawing-room had seemed empty;
Mrs. Luke, in her sole person, filled and illumined it.

Widdowson addressed this resplendent personage by her Christian name,
his familiarity exciting in Monica an irrational surprise. He presented
the sisters to her, and Mrs. Luke, bowing grandly at a distance, drew
from her bosom a gold-rimmed _pince-nez_, through which she scrutinized
Monica. The smile which followed might have been interpreted in several
senses; Widdowson, alone capable of remarking it, answered with a look
of severe dignity.

Mrs. Luke had no thought of apologizing for the lateness of her
arrival, and it was evident that she did not intend to stay long. Her
purpose seemed to be to make the occasion as informal as possible.

'Do you, by chance, know the Hodgson Bulls?' she asked of her relative,
interrupting him in the nervous commonplaces with which he was
endeavouring to smooth the way to a general conversation. She had the
accent of cultivation, but spoke rather imperiously.

'I never heard of them,' was the cold reply.

'No? They live somewhere about here. I have to make a call on them. I
suppose my coachman will find the place.'

There was an awkward silence. Widdowson was about to say something to
Monica, when Mrs. Luke, who had again closely observed the girl through
the glasses, interposed in a gentle tone.

'Do you like this neighbourhood, Miss Madden?'

Monica gave the expected answer, her voice sounding very weak and timid
by comparison. And so, for some ten minutes, an appearance of dialogue
was sustained. Mrs. Luke, though still condescending, evinced a desire
to be agreeable; she smiled and nodded in reply to the girl's remarks,
and occasionally addressed Virginia with careful civility, conveying
the impression, perhaps involuntarily, that she commiserated the shy
and shabbily-dressed person. Tea was brought in, and after pretending
to take a cup, she rose for departure.

'Perhaps you will come and see me some day, Miss Madden,' fell from her
with unanticipated graciousness, as she stepped forward to the girl and
offered her hand. 'Edmund must bring you--at some quiet time when we
can talk. Very glad to have met you--very glad indeed.'

And the personage was gone; they heard her carriage roll away from
beneath the window. All three drew a breath of relief, and Widdowson,
suddenly quite another man, took a place near to Virginia, with whom in
a few minutes he was conversing in the friendliest way. Virginia,
experiencing a like relief, also became herself; she found courage to
ask needful questions, which in every case were satisfactorily met. Of
Mrs. Luke there was no word, but when they had taken their leave--the
visit lasted altogether some two hours--Monica and her sister discussed
that great lady with the utmost freedom. They agreed that she was
personally detestable.

'But very rich, my dear,' said Virginia in a murmuring voice. 'You can
see that. I have met such people before; they have a manner--oh! Of
course Mr. Widdowson will take you to call upon her.'

'When nobody else is likely to be there; that's what she meant,'
remarked Monica coldly.

'Never mind, my love. You don't wish for grand society. I am very glad
to tell you that Edmund impresses me very favourably. He is reserved,
but that is no fault. Oh, we must write to Alice at once! Her surprise!
Her delight!'

When, on the next day, Monica met her betrothed in Regent's Park--she
still lived with Mildred Vesper, but no longer went to Great Portland
Street--their talk was naturally of Mrs. Luke. Widdowson speedily led
to the topic.

'I had told you,' he said, with careful accent, 'that I see very little
of her. I can't say that I like her, but she is a very difficult person
to understand, and I fancy she often gives offence when she doesn't at
all mean it. Still, I hope you were not--displeased?'

Monica avoided a direct answer.

'Shall you take me to see her?' were her words.

'If you will go, dear. And I have no doubt she will be present at our
wedding. Unfortunately, she's my only relative; or the only one I know
anything about. After our marriage I don't think we shall see much of
her--'

'No, I dare say not,' was Monica's remark. And thereupon they turned to
pleasanter themes.

That morning Widdowson had received from his sister-in-law a scribbled
post-card, asking him to call upon Mrs. Luke early the day that
followed. Of course this meant that the lady was desirous of further
talk concerning Miss Madden. Unwillingly, but as a matter of duty, he
kept the appointment. It was at eleven in the morning, and, when
admitted to the flat in Victoria Street which was his relative's abode,
he had to wait a quarter of an hour for the lady's appearance.

Luxurious fashion, as might have been expected, distinguished Mrs.
Luke's drawing-room. Costly and beautiful things superabounded; perfume
soothed the air. Only since her bereavement had Mrs. Widdowson been
able to indulge this taste for modern exuberance in domestic adornment.
The deceased Luke was a plain man of business, who clung to the
fashions which had been familiar to him in his youth; his second wife
found a suburban house already furnished, and her influence with him
could not prevail to banish the horrors amid which he chose to live:
chairs in maroon rep, Brussels carpets of red roses on a green ground,
horse-hair sofas of the most uncomfortable shape ever designed,
antimacassars everywhere, chimney ornaments of cut glass trembling in
sympathy with the kindred chandeliers. She belonged to an obscure
branch of a house that culminated in an obscure baronetcy; penniless
and ambitious, she had to thank her imposing physique for rescue at a
perilous age, and though despising Mr. Luke Widdowson for his plebeian
tastes, she shrewdly retained the good-will of a husband who seemed no
candidate for length of years. The money-maker died much sooner than
she could reasonably have hoped, and left her an income of four
thousand pounds. Thereupon began for Mrs. Luke a life of feverish
aspiration. The baronetcy to which she was akin had inspired her, even
from childhood, with an aristocratic ideal; a handsome widow of only
eight-and-thirty, she resolved that her wealth should pave the way for
her to a titled alliance. Her acquaintance lay among City people, but
with the opportunities of freedom it was soon extended to the sphere of
what is known as smart society; her flat in Victoria Street attracted a
heterogeneous cluster of pleasure-seekers and fortune-hunters, among
them one or two vagrant members of the younger aristocracy. She lived
at the utmost pace compatible with technical virtue. When, as shortly
happened, it became evident that her income was not large enough for
her serious purpose, she took counsel with an old friend great in
finance, and thenceforth the excitement of the gambler gave a new zest
to her turbid existence. Like most of her female associates, she had
free recourse to the bottle; but for such stimulus the life of a smart
woman would be physically impossible. And Mrs. Luke enjoyed life,
enjoyed it vastly. The goal of her ambition, if all went well in the
City, was quite within reasonable hope. She foretasted the day when a
vulgar prefix would no longer attach to her name, and when the journals
of society would reflect her rising effulgence.

Widdowson was growing impatient, when his relative at length appeared.
She threw herself into a deep chair, crossed her legs, and gazed at him
mockingly.

'Well, it isn't quite so bad as I feared, Edmund.'

'What do you mean?'

'Oh, she's a decent enough little girl, I can see. But you're a silly
fellow for all that. You couldn't have deceived me, you know. If
