suppose your estimate of my character remains very much the same as
years ago?'

'What is the use of such questions?'

'I ask for a distinct purpose. You can't regard me with any respect?'

'To tell you the truth, Everard, I know nothing about you. I have no
wish to revive disagreeable memories, and I think it quite possible
that you may be worthy of respect.'

'So far so good. Now, in justice, please answer me another question.
How have you spoken of me to Miss Nunn?'

'How can it matter?'

'It matters a good deal. Have you told her any scandal about me?'

'Yes, I have.'

Everard looked at her with surprise.

'I spoke to Miss Nunn about you,' she continued, 'before I thought of
your coming here. Frankly, I used you as an illustration of the evils I
abominate.'

'You are a courageous and plain-spoken woman, cousin Mary,' said
Everard, laughing a little. 'Couldn't you have found some other
example?'

There was no reply.

'So,' he proceeded, 'Miss Nunn regards me as a proved scoundrel?'

'I never told her the story. I made known the general grounds of my
dissatisfaction with you, that was all.'

'Come, that's something. I'm glad you didn't amuse her with that
unedifying bit of fiction.'

'Fiction?'

'Yes, fiction,' said Everard bluntly. 'I am not going into details; the
thing's over and done with, and I chose my course at the time. But it's
as well to let you know that my behaviour was grossly misrepresented.
In using me to point a moral you were grievously astray. I shall say no
more. Ii you can believe me, do; if you can't, dismiss the matter from
your mind.'

There followed a silence of some moments. Then, with a perfectly calm
manner, Miss Barfoot began to speak of a new subject. Everard followed
her lead. He did not stay much longer, and on leaving asked to be
remembered to Miss Nunn.

A week later he again found his cousin alone. He now felt sure that
Miss Nunn was keeping out of his way. Her parting from him in the
gardens had been decidedly abrupt, and possibly it signified more
serious offence than at the time he attributed to her. It was so
difficult to be sure of anything in regard to Miss Nunn. If another
woman had acted thus he would have judged it coquetry. But perhaps
Rhoda was quite incapable of anything of that kind. Perhaps she took
herself so very seriously that the mere suspicion of banter in his talk
had moved her to grave resentment. Or again, she might be half ashamed
to meet him after confessing her disagreement with Miss Barfoot; on
recovery from ill-temper (unmistakable ill-temper it was), she had seen
her behaviour in an embarrassing light. Between these various
conjectures he wavered whilst talking with Mary. But he did not so much
as mention Miss Nunn's name.

Some ten days went by, and he paid a call at the hour sanctioned by
society, five in the afternoon; it being Saturday. One of his reasons
for coming at this time was the hope that he might meet other callers,
for he felt curious to see what sort of people visited the house. And
this wish was gratified. On entering the drawing-room, whither he was
led by the servant straightway, after the manner of the world, he found
not only his cousin and her friend, but two strangers, ladies. A glance
informed him that both of these were young and good-looking, one being
a type that particularly pleased him--dark, pale, with very bright eyes.

Miss Barfoot received him as any hostess would have done. She was her
cheerful self once more, and in a moment introduced him to the lady
with whom she had been talking--the dark one, by name Mrs. Widdowson.
Rhoda Nunn, sitting apart with the second lady, gave him her hand, but
at once resumed her conversation.

With Mrs. Widdowson he was soon chatting in his easy and graceful way,
Miss Barfoot putting in a word now and then. He saw that she had not
long been married; a pleasant diffidence and the maidenly glance of her
bright eyes indicated this. She was dressed very prettily, and seemed
aware of it.

'We went to hear the new opera at the Savoy last night,' she said to
Miss Barfoot, with a smile of remembered enjoyment.

'Did you? Miss Nunn and I were there.'

Everard gazed at his cousin with humorous incredulity.

'Is it possible?' he exclaimed. 'You were at the Savoy?'

'Where is the impossibility? Why shouldn't Miss Nunn and I go to the
theatre?'

'I appeal to Mrs. Widdowson. She also was astonished.'

'Yes, indeed I was, Miss Barfoot!' exclaimed the younger lady, with a
merry little laugh. 'I hesitated before speaking of such a frivolous
entertainment.'

Lowering her voice, and casting a smile in Rhoda's direction, Miss
Barfoot replied,--

'I have to make a concession occasionally on Miss Nunn's account. It
would be unkind never to allow her a little recreation.'

The two at a distance were talking earnestly, with grave countenances.
In a few moments they rose, and the visitor came towards Miss Barfoot
to take her leave. Thereupon Everard crossed to Miss Nunn.

'Is there anything very good in the new Gilbert and Sullivan opera?' he
asked.

'Many good things. You really haven't been yet?'

'No--I'm ashamed to say.'

'Do go this evening, if you can get a seat. Which part of the theatre
do you prefer?'

His eye rested on her, but he could detect no irony.

'I'm a poor man, you know. I have to be content with the cheap places.
Which do you like best, the Savoy operas or the burlesques at the
Gaiety?'

A few more such questions and answers, of laboured commonplace or
strained flippancy, and Everard, after searching his companion's face,
broke off with a laugh.

'There now,' he said, 'we have talked in the approved five o'clock way.
Precisely the dialogue I heard in a drawing-room yesterday. It goes on
day after day, year after year, through the whole of people's lives.'

'You are on friendly terms with such people?'

'I am on friendly terms with people of every kind.' He added, in an
undertone, 'I hope I may include you, Miss Nunn?'

But to this she paid no attention. She was looking at Monica and Miss
Barfoot, who had just risen from their seats. They approached, and
presently Barfoot found himself alone with the familiar pair.

'Another cup of tea, Everard?' asked his cousin.

'Thank you. Who was the young lady you didn't introduce me to?'

'Miss Haven--one of our pupils.'

'Does she think of going into business?'

'She has just got a place in the publishing department of a weekly
paper.'

'But really--from the few words of her talk that fell upon my ear I
should have thought her a highly educated girl.'

'So she is,' replied Miss Barfoot. 'What is your objection?'

'Why doesn't she aim at some better position?'

Miss Barfoot and Rhoda exchanged smiles.

'But nothing could be better for her. Some day she hopes to start a
paper of her own, and to learn all the details of such business is just
what she wants. Oh, you are still very conventional, Everard. You meant
she ought to take up something graceful and pretty--something ladylike.'

'No, no. It's all right. I thoroughly approve. And when Miss Haven
starts her paper, Miss Nunn will write for it.'

'I hope so,' assented his cousin.

'You make me feel that I am in touch with the great movements of our
time. It's delightful to know you. But come now, isn't there any way in
which I could help?'

Mary laughed.

'None whatever, I'm afraid.'

'Well,--"They also serve who only stand and wait."'

If Everard had pleased himself he would have visited the house in
Queen's Road every other day. As this might not be, he spent a good
deal of his time in other society, not caring to read much, or
otherwise occupy his solitude. Starting with one or two acquaintances
in London, people of means and position, he easily extended his social
sphere. Had he cared to marry, he might, notwithstanding his poverty,
have wooed with fair chance in a certain wealthy family, where two
daughters, the sole children, plain but well-instructed girls, waited
for the men of brains who should appreciate them. So rare in society,
these men of brains, and, alas! so frequently deserted by their wisdom
when it comes to choosing a wife. It being his principle to reflect on
every possibility, Barfoot of course asked himself whether it would not
be reasonable to approach one or other of these young women--the Miss
Brissendens. He needed a larger income; he wanted to travel in a more
satisfactory way than during his late absence. Agnes Brissenden struck
him as a very calm and sensible girl; not at all likely to marry any
one but the man who would be a suitable companion for her, and probably
disposed to look on marriage as a permanent friendship, which must not
be endangered by feminine follies. She had no beauty, but mental powers
above the average--superior, certainly, to her sister's.

It was worth thinking about, but in the meantime he wanted to see much
more of Rhoda Nunn. Rhoda he was beginning to class with women who are
attractive both physically and mentally. Strange how her face had
altered to his perception since the first meeting. He smiled now when
he beheld it--smiled as a man does when his senses are pleasantly
affected. He was getting to know it so well, to be prepared for its
constant changes, to watch for certain movements of brows or lips when
he had said certain things. That forcible holding of her hand had
marked a stage in progressive appreciation; since then he felt a desire
to repeat the experiment.

'Or if thy mistress some rich anger shows, Imprison her soft hand, and
let her rave--'

The lines occurred to his memory, and he understood them better than
heretofore. It would delight him to enrage Rhoda, and then to detain
her by strength, to overcome her senses, to watch her long lashes droop
over the eloquent eyes. But this was something very like being in love,
and he by no means wished to be seriously in love with Miss Nunn.

It was another three weeks before he had an opportunity of private talk
with her. Trying a Sunday afternoon, about four, he found Rhoda alone
in the drawing-room; Miss Barfoot was out of town. Rhoda's greeting had
a frank friendliness which she had not bestowed upon him for a long
time; not, indeed, since they met on her return from Cheddar. She
looked very well, readily laughed, and seemed altogether in a coming-on
disposition. Barfoot noticed that the piano was open.

'Do you play?' he inquired. 'Strange that I should still have to ask
the question.'

'Oh, only a hymn on Sunday,' she answered off-hand.

'A hymn?'

'Why not? I like some of the old tunes very much. They remind me of the
golden age.'

'In your own life, you mean?'

She nodded.

'You have once or twice spoken of that time as if you were not quite
happy in the present.'

'Of course I am not quite happy. What woman is? I mean, what woman
above the level of a petted pussy-cat?'

Everard was leaning towards her on the head of the couch where he sat.
He gazed into her face fixedly.

'I wish it were in my power to remove some of your discontents. I
would, more gladly than I can tell you.'

'You abound in good nature, Mr. Barfoot,' she replied laughing. 'But
unfortunately you can't change the world.'

'Not the world at large. But might I not change your views of it--in
some respects?'

'Indeed I don't see how you could. I think I had rather have my own
view than any you might wish to substitute for it.'

In this humour she seemed more than ever a challenge to his manhood.
She was armed at all points. She feared nothing that he might say. No
flush of apprehension; no nervous tremor; no weak self-consciousness.
Yet he saw her as a woman, and desirable.

'My views are not ignoble,' he murmured.

'I hope not. But they are the views of a man.'

'Man and woman ought to see life with much the same eyes.'

'Ought they? Perhaps so. I am not sure. But they never will in our
time.'

'Individuals may. The man and woman who have thrown away prejudice and
superstition. You and I, for instance.'

'Oh, those words have such different meanings. In your judgment I
should seem full of idle prejudice.'

She liked this conversation; he read pleasure in her face, saw in her
eyes a glint of merry defiance. And his pulses throbbed the quicker for
it.

'You have a prejudice against _me_, for instance.'

'Pray, did you go to the Savoy?' inquired Rhoda absently.

'I have no intention of talking about the Savoy, Miss Nunn. It is
teacup time, but as yet we have the room to ourselves.'

Rhoda went and rang the bell.

'The teacups shall come at once.'

He laughed slightly, and looked at her from beneath drooping lids.
Rhoda went on with talk of trifles, until the tea was brought and she
had given a cup. Having emptied it at two draughts, he resumed his
former leaning position.

'Well, you were saying that you had a prejudice against me. Of course
my cousin Mary is accountable for that. Mary has used me rather ill.
Before ever you saw me, I represented to your mind something very
disagreeable indeed. That was too bad of my cousin.'

Rhoda, sipping her tea, had a cold, uninterested expression.

'I didn't know of this,' he proceeded, 'when we met that day in the
gardens, and when I made you so angry.'

'I wasn't disposed to jest about what had happened.'

'But neither was I. You quite misunderstood me. Will you tell me how
that unpleasantness came to an end?'

'Oh yes. I admitted that I had been ill-mannered and obstinate.'

'How delightful! Obstinate? I have a great deal of that in my
character. All the active part of my life was one long fit of
obstinacy. As a lad I determined on a certain career, and I stuck to it
in spite of conscious unfitness, in spite of a great deal of suffering,
out of sheer obstinacy. I wonder whether Mary ever told you that.'

'She mentioned something of the kind once.'

'You could hardly believe it, I dare say? I am a far more reasonable
being now. I have changed in so many respects that I hardly know my old
self when I look back on it. Above all, in my thoughts about women. If
I had married during my twenties I should have chosen, as the average
man does, some simpleton--with unpleasant results. If I marry now, it
will be a woman of character and brains. Marry in the legal sense I
never shall. My companion must be as independent of forms as I am
myself.'

Rhoda looked into her teacup for a second or two, then said with a
smile,--

'You also are a reformer?'

'In that direction.'

He had difficulty in suppressing signs of nervousness. The bold
declaration had come without forethought, and Rhoda's calm acceptance
of it delighted him.

'Questions of marriage,' she went on to say, 'don't interest me much;
but this particular reform doesn't seem very practical. It is trying to
bring about an ideal state of things whilst we are yet struggling with
elementary obstacles.'

'I don't advocate this liberty for all mankind. Only for those who are
worthy of it.'

'And what'--she laughed a little--'are the sure signs of worthiness? I
think it would be very needful to know them.'

Everard kept a grave face.

'True. But a free union presupposes equality of position. No honest man
would propose it, for instance, to a woman incapable of understanding
all it involved, or incapable of resuming her separate life if that
became desirable. I admit all the difficulties. One must consider those
of feeling, as well as the material. If my wife should declare that she
must be released, I might suffer grievously, but being a man of some
intelligence, I should admit that the suffering couldn't be helped; the
brutality of enforced marriage doesn't seem to me an alternative worth
considering. It wouldn't seem so to any woman of the kind I mean.'

Would she have the courage to urge one grave difficulty that he left
aside? No. He fancied her about to speak, but she ended by offering him
another cup of tea.

'After all, that is _not_ your ideal?' he said.

'I haven't to do with the subject at all,' Rhoda answered, with perhaps
a trace of impatience. 'My work and thought are for the women who do
not marry--the 'odd women' I call them. They alone interest me. One
mustn't undertake too much.'

'And you resolutely class yourself with them?'

'Of course I do.'

'And therefore you have certain views of life which I should like to
change. You are doing good work, but I had rather see any other woman
in the world devote her life to it. I am selfish enough to wish--'

The door opened, and the servant announced,--

'Mr. and Mrs. Widdowson.'

With perfect self-command Miss Nunn rose and stepped forward. Barfoot,
rising more slowly, looked with curiosity at the husband of the pretty,
black-browed woman whom he had already met. Widdowson surprised and
amused him. How had this stiff, stern fellow with the grizzled beard
won such a wife? Not that Mrs. Widdowson seemed a remarkable person,
but certainly it was an ill-assorted union.

She came and shook hands. As he spoke a few natural words, Everard
chanced to notice that the husband's eye was upon him, and with what a
look! If ever a man declared in his countenance the worst species of
jealous temper, Mr. Widdowson did so. His fixed smile became sardonic.

Presently Barfoot and he were introduced. They had nothing to say to
each other, but Everard maintained a brief conversation just to observe
the man. Turning at length, he began to talk with Mrs. Widdowson, and,
because he was conscious of the jealous eye, assumed an especial
sprightliness, an air of familiar pleasantry, to which the lady
responded, but with a nervous hesitation.

The arrival of these people was an intense annoyance to him. Another
quarter of an hour and things would have come to an exciting pass
between Rhoda and himself; he would have heard how she received a
declaration of love. Rhoda's self-possession notwithstanding, he
believed that he was not without power over her. She liked to talk with
him, enjoyed the freedom he allowed himself in choice of subject.
Perhaps no man before had ever shown an appreciation of her qualities
as woman. But she would not yield, was in no real danger from his
love-making. Nay, the danger was to his own peace. He felt that
resistance would intensify the ardour of his wooing, and possibly end
by making him a victim of genuine passion. Well, let her enjoy that
triumph, if she were capable of winning it.

He had made up his mind to outstay the Widdowsons, who clearly would
not make a long call. But the fates were against him. Another visitor
arrived, a lady named Cosgrove, who settled herself as if for at least
an hour. Worse than that, he heard her say to Rhoda,--

'Oh, then do come and dine with us. Do, I beg!'

'I will, with pleasure,' was Miss Nunn's reply. 'Can you wait and take
me with you?'

Useless to stay longer. As soon as the Widdowsons had departed he went
up to Rhoda and silently offered his hand. She scarcely looked at him,
and did not in the least return his pressure.

Rhoda dined at Mrs. Cosgrove's, and was home again at eleven o'clock.
When the house was locked up, and the servants had gone to bed, she sat
in the library, turning over a book that she had brought from her
friend's house. It was a volume of essays, one of which dealt with the
relations between the sexes in a very modern spirit, treating the
subject as a perfectly open one, and arriving at unorthodox
conclusions. Mrs. Cosgrove had spoken of this dissertation with lively
interest. Rhoda perused it very carefully, pausing now and then to
reflect.

In this reading of her mind, Barfoot came near the truth.

No man had ever made love to her; no man, to her knowledge, had ever
been tempted to do so. In certain moods she derived satisfaction from
this thought, using it to strengthen her life's purpose; having passed
her thirtieth year, she might take it as a settled thing that she would
never be sought in marriage, and so could shut the doors on every
instinct tending to trouble her intellectual decisions. But these
instincts sometimes refused to be thus treated. As Miss Barfoot told
her, she was very young for her years, young in physique, young in
emotion. As a girl she had dreamt passionately, and the fires of her
nature, though hidden beneath aggregations of moral and mental
attainment, were not yet smothered. An hour of lassitude filled her
with despondency, none the less real because she was ashamed of it. If
only she had once been loved, like other women--if she had listened to
an offer of devotion, and rejected it--her heart would be more securely
at peace. So she thought. Secretly she deemed it a hard thing never to
have known that common triumph of her sex. And, moreover, it took away
from the merit of her position as a leader and encourager of women
living independently. There might be some who said, or thought, that
she made a virtue of necessity.

Everard Barfoot's advances surprised her not a little. Judging him as a
man wholly without principle, she supposed at first that this was
merely his way with all women, and resented it as impertinence. But
even then she did not dislike the show of homage; what her mind
regarded with disdain, her heart was all but willing to feed upon,
after its long hunger. Barfoot interested her, and not the less because
of his evil reputation. Here was one of the men for whom
women--doubtless more than one--had sacrificed themselves; she could
not but regard him with sexual curiosity. And her interest grew, her
curiosity was more haunting, as their acquaintance became a sort of
friendship; she found that her moral disapprobation wavered, or was
altogether forgotten. Perhaps it was to compensate for this that she
went the length of outraging Miss Barfoot's feelings on the death of
Bella Royston.

Certainly she thought with much frequency of Barfoot, and looked
forward to his coming. Never had she wished so much to see him again as
after their encounter in Chelsea Gardens, and on that account she
forced herself to hold aloof when he came. It was not love, nor the
beginning of love; she judged it something less possible to avow. The
man's presence affected her with a perturbation which she had no
difficulty in concealing at the time, though afterwards it distressed
and shamed her. She took refuge in the undeniable fact that the quality
of his mind made an impression upon her, that his talk was sympathetic.
Miss Barfoot submitted to this influence; she confessed that her
cousin's talk had always had a charm for her.

Could it be that this man reciprocated, and more than reciprocated, her
complex feeling? To-day only accident had prevented him from making an
avowal of love--unless she strangely mistook him. All the evening she
had dwelt on this thought; it grew more and more astonishing. Was he
worse than she had imagined? Under cover of independent thought, of
serious moral theories, did he conceal mere profligacy and
heartlessness? It was an extraordinary thing to have to ask such
questions in relation to herself. It made her feel as if she had to
learn herself anew, to form a fresh conception of her personality. She
the object of a man's passion!

And the thought was exultant. Even thus late, then, the satisfaction of
vanity had been granted her--nay, not of vanity alone.

He must be sincere. What motive could he possibly have for playing a
part? Might it not be true that he was a changed man in certain
respects, and that a genuine emotion at length had control of him? If
so, she had only to wait for his next speech with her in private; she
could not misjudge a lover's pleading.

The interest would only be that of comedy. She did not love Everard
Barfoot, and saw no likelihood of ever doing so; on the whole, a
subject for thankfulness. Nor could he seriously anticipate an assent
to his proposal for a free union; in declaring that legal marriage was
out of the question for him, he had removed his love-making to the
region of mere ideal sentiment. But, if he loved her, these theories
would sooner or later be swept aside; he would plead with her to become
his legal wife.

To that point she desired to bring him. Offer what he might, she would
not accept it; but the secret chagrin that was upon her would be
removed. Love would no longer be the privilege of other women. To
reject a lover in so many respects desirable, whom so many women might
envy her, would fortify her self-esteem, and enable her to go forward
in the chosen path with firmer tread.

It was one o'clock; the fire had died out and she began to shiver with
cold. But a trembling of joy at the same time went through her limbs;
again she had the sense of exultation, of triumph. She would not
dismiss him peremptorily. He should prove the quality of his love, if
love it were. Coming so late, the experience must yield her all it had
to yield of delight and contentment.




CHAPTER XV

THE JOYS OF HOME


Monica and her husband, on leaving the house in Queen's Road, walked
slowly in the eastward direction. Though night had fallen, the air was
not unpleasant; they had no object before them, and for five minutes
they occupied themselves with their thoughts. Then Widdowson stopped.

'Shall we go home again?' he asked, just glancing at Monica, then
letting his eyes stray vaguely in the gloom.

'I should like to see Milly, but I'm afraid I can hardly take you there
to call with me.'

'Why not?'

'It's a very poor little sitting-room, you know, and she might have
some friend. Isn't there anywhere you could go, and meet me afterwards?'

Frowning, Widdowson looked at his watch.

'Nearly six o'clock. There isn't much time.'

'Edmund, suppose you go home, and let me come back by myself? You
wouldn't mind, for once? I should like so much to have a talk with
Milly. If I got back about nine or half-past, I could have a little
supper, and that's all I should want.'

He answered abruptly,--

'Oh, but I can't have you going about alone at night.'

'Why not?' answered Monica, with a just perceptible note of irritation.
'Are you afraid I shall be robbed or murdered?'

'Nonsense. But you mustn't be alone.'

'Didn't I always use to be alone?'

He made an angry gesture.

'I have begged you not to speak of that. Why do you say what you know
is disagreeable to me? You used to do all sorts of things that you
never ought to have been obliged to do, and it's very painful to
remember it.'

Monica, seeing that people were approaching, walked on, and neither
spoke until they had nearly reached the end of the road.

'I think we had better go home,' Widdowson at length remarked.

'If you wish it; but I really don't see why I shouldn't call on Milly,
now that we are here.'

'Why didn't you speak of it before we left home? You ought to be more
methodical, Monica. Each morning I always plan how my day is to be
spent, and it would be much better if you would do the same. Then you
wouldn't be so restless and uncertain.'

'If I go to Rutland Street,' said Monica, without heeding this
admonition, 'couldn't you leave me there for an hour?'

'What in the world am I to do?'

'I should have thought you might walk about. It's a pity you don't know
more people, Edmund. It would make things so much pleasanter for you.'

In the end he consented to see her safely as far as Rutland Street,
occupy himself for an hour, and come back for her. They went by cab,
which was dismissed in Hampstead Road. Widdowson did not turn away
until he had ocular proof of his wife's admittance to the house where
Miss Vesper lived, and even then he walked no farther than the
neighbouring streets, returning about every ten minutes to watch the
house from a short distance, as though he feared Monica might have some
project of escape. His look was very bilious; trudging mechanically
hither and thither where fewest people were to be met, he kept his eyes
on the ground, and clumped to a dismal rhythm with the end of his
walking-stick. In the three or four months since his marriage, he
seemed to have grown older; he no longer held himself so upright.

At the very moment agreed upon he was waiting close by the house. Five
minutes passed; twice he had looked at his watch, and he grew
excessively impatient, stamping as if it were necessary to keep himself
warm. Another five minutes, and he uttered a nervous ejaculation. He
had all but made up his mind to go and knock at the door when Monica
came forth.

'You haven't been waiting here long, I hope?' she said cheerfully.

'Ten minutes. But it doesn't matter.'

'I'm very sorry. We were talking on--'

'Yes, but one must always be punctual. I wish I could impress that upon
you. Life without punctuality is quite impossible.'

'I'm very sorry, Edmund. I will be more careful. Please don't lecture
me, dear. How shall we go home?'

'We had better take a cab to Victoria. No knowing how long we may have
to wait for a train when we get there.'

'Now don't be so grumpy. Where have you been all the time?'

'Oh, walking about. What else was I to do?'

On the drive they held no conversation. At Victoria they were delayed
about half an hour before a train started for Herne Hill; Monica sat in
a waiting-room, and her husband trudged about the platform, still
clumping rhythmically with his stick.

Their Sunday custom was to dine at one o'clock, and at six to have tea.
Widdowson hated the slightest interference with domestic routine, and
he had reluctantly indulged Monica's desire to go to Chelsea this
afternoon. Hunger was now added to his causes of discontent.

'Let us have something to eat at once,' he said on entering the house.
'This disorder really won't do: we must manage better somehow.'

Without replying, Monica rang the dining-room bell, and gave orders.

Little change had been made in the interior of the house since its
master's marriage. The dressing-room adjoining the principal
bed-chamber was adapted to Monica's use, and a few ornaments were added
to the drawing-room. Unlike his deceased brother, Widdowson had the
elements of artistic taste; in furnishing his abode he took counsel
with approved decorators, and at moderate cost had made himself a home
which presented no original features, but gave no offence to a
cultivated eye. The first sight of the rooms pleased Monica greatly.
She declared that all was perfect, nothing need be altered. In those
days, if she had bidden him spend a hundred pounds on reconstruction,
the lover would have obeyed, delighted to hear her express a wish.

Though competence had come to him only after a lifetime of narrow
means, Widdowson felt no temptation to parsimony. Secure in his
all-sufficing income, he grudged no expenditure that could bring
himself or his wife satisfaction. On the wedding-tour in Cornwall,
Devon, and Somerset--it lasted about seven weeks--Monica learnt, among
other things less agreeable, that her husband was generous with money.

He was anxious she should dress well, though only, as Monica soon
discovered, for his own gratification. Soon after they had settled down
at home she equipped herself for the cold season, and Widdowson cared
little about the price so long as the effect of her new costumes was
pleasing to him.

'You are making a butterfly of me,' said Monica merrily, when he
expressed strong approval of a bright morning dress that had just come
home.

'A beautiful woman,' he replied, with the nervous gravity which still
possessed him when complimenting her, or saying tender things, 'a
beautiful woman ought to be beautifully clad.'

At the same time he endeavoured to impress her with the gravest sense
of a married woman's obligations. His raptures, genuine enough, were
sometimes interrupted in the oddest way if Monica chanced to utter a
careless remark of which he could not strictly approve, and such
interruptions frequently became the opportunity for a long and solemn
review of the wifely status. Without much trouble he had brought her
into a daily routine which satisfied him. During the whole of the
morning she was to be absorbed in household cares. In the afternoon he
would take her to walk or drive, and the evening he wished her to spend
either in drawing-room or library, occupied with a book. Monica soon
found that his idea of wedded happiness was that they should always be
together. Most reluctantly he consented to her going any distance
alone, for whatever purpose. Public entertainments he regarded with no
great favour, but when he saw how Monica enjoyed herself at concert or
theatre, he made no objection to indulging her at intervals of a
fortnight or so; his own fondness for music made this compliance
easier. He was jealous of her forming new acquaintances; indifferent to
society himself, he thought his wife should be satisfied with her
present friends, and could not understand why she wished to see them so
often.

The girl was docile, and for a time he imagined that there would never
be conflict between his will and hers. Whilst enjoying their holiday
they naturally went everywhere together, and were scarce an hour out of
each other's presence, day or night. In quiet spots by the seashore,
when they sat in solitude, Widdowson's tongue was loosened, and he
poured forth his philosophy of life with the happy assurance that
Monica would listen passively. His devotion to her proved itself in a
thousand ways; week after week he grew, if anything, more kind, more
tender; yet in his view of their relations he was unconsciously the
most complete despot, a monument of male autocracy. Never had it
occurred to Widdowson that a wife remains an individual, with rights
and obligations independent of her wifely condition. Everything he said
presupposed his own supremacy; he took for granted that it was his to
direct, hers to be guided. A display of energy, purpose, ambition, on
Monica's part, which had no reference to domestic pursuits, would have
gravely troubled him; at once he would have set himself to subdue, with
all gentleness, impulses so inimical to his idea of the married state.
It rejoiced him that she spoke with so little sympathy of the
principles supported by Miss Barfoot and Miss Nunn; these persons
seemed to him well-meaning, but grievously mistaken. Miss Nunn he
judged 'unwomanly,' and hoped in secret that Monica would not long
remain on terms of friendship with her. Of course his wife's former
pursuits were an abomination to him; he could not bear to hear them
referred to.

'Woman's sphere is the home, Monica. Unfortunately girls are often
obliged to go out and earn their living, but this is unnatural, a
necessity which advanced civilization will altogether abolish. You
shall read John Ruskin; every word he says about women is good and
precious. If a woman can neither have a home of her own, nor find
occupation in any one else's she is deeply to be pitied; her life is
bound to be unhappy. I sincerely believe that an educated woman had
better become a domestic servant than try to imitate the life of a man.'

Monica seemed to listen attentively, but before long she accustomed
herself to wear this look whilst in truth she was thinking her own
thoughts. And as often as not they were of a nature little suspected by
her prosing companion.

He believed himself the happiest of men. He had taken a daring step,
but fortune smiled upon him, Monica was all he had imagined in his
love-fever; knowledge of her had as yet brought to light no single
untruth, not trait of character that he could condemn. That she
returned his love he would not and could not doubt. And something she
said to him one day, early in their honeymoon, filled up the measure of
his bliss.

'What a change you have made in my life, Edmund! How much I have to
thank you for!'

That was what he had hoped to hear. He had thought it himself; had
wondered whether Monica saw her position in this light. And when the
words actually fell from her lips he glowed with joy. This, to his
mind, was the perfect relation of wife to husband. She must look up to
him as her benefactor, her providence. It would have pleased him still
better if she had not possessed a penny of her own, but happily Monica
seemed never to give a thought to the sum at her disposal.

Surely he was the easiest of men to live with. When he first became
aware that Monica suffered an occasional discontent, it caused him
troublous surprise. As soon as he understood that she desired more
freedom of movement, he became anxious, suspicious irritable. Nothing
like a quarrel had yet taken place between them, but Widdowson began to
perceive that he must exert authority in a way he had imagined would
never be necessary. All his fears, after all, were not groundless.
Monica's undomestic life, and perhaps the association with those
Chelsea people, had left results upon her mind. By way of mild
discipline, he first of all suggested a closer attention to the affairs
of the house. Would it not be well if she spent an hour a day in sewing
or fancy work? Monica so far obeyed as to provide herself with some
plain needlework, but Widdowson, watching with keen eye, soon remarked
that her use of the needle was only a feint. He lay awake o' nights,
pondering darkly.

On the present evening he was more decidedly out of temper than ever
hitherto. He satisfied his hunger hurriedly and in silence. Then,
observing that Monica ate only a few morsels, he took offence at this.

'I'm afraid you are not well, dear. You have had no appetite for
several days.'

'As much as usual, I think,' she replied absently.

They went into the library, commonly their resort of an evening.
Widdowson possessed several hundred volumes of English literature, most
of them the works which are supposed to be indispensible to a
well-informed man, though very few men even make a pretence of reading
them. Self-educated, Widdowson deemed it his duty to make acquaintance
with the great, the solid authors. Nor was his study of them
affectation. For the poets he had little taste; the novelists he
considered only profitable in intervals of graver reading; but history,
political economy, even metaphysics, genuinely appealed to him. He had
always two or three solid books on hand, each with its marker; he
studied them at stated hours, and always sitting at a table, a notebook
open beside him. A little work once well-known, Todd's 'Student's
Manual,' had formed his method and inspired him with zeal.

To-night, it being Sunday, he took down a volume of Barrow's Sermons.
Though not strictly orthodox in religious faith, he conformed to the
practices of the Church of England, and since his marriage had been
more scrupulous on this point than before. He abhorred unorthodoxy in a
woman, and would not on any account have suffered Monica to surmise
that he had his doubts concerning any article of the Christian faith.
Like most men of his kind, he viewed religion as a precious and
powerful instrument for directing the female conscience. Frequently he
read aloud to his wife, but this evening he showed no intention of
doing so. Monica, however, sat unoccupied. After glancing at her once
or twice, he said reprovingly,--

'Have you finished your Sunday book?'

'Not quite. But I don't care to read just now.'

The silence that followed was broken by Monica herself.

'Have you accepted Mrs. Luke's invitation to dinner?' she asked.

'I have declined it,' was the reply, carelessly given.

Monica bit her lip.

'But why?'

'Surely we needn't discuss that over again, Monica.'

His eyes were still on the book, and he stirred impatiently.

'But,' urged his wife, 'do you mean to break with her altogether? If
so, I think it's very unwise, Edmund. What an opinion you must have of
me, if you think I can't see people's faults! I know it's very true,
all you say about her. But she wishes to be kind to us, I'm sure--and I
like to see something of a life so different from our own.'

Widdowson drummed on the floor with his foot. In a few moments,
ignoring Monica's remarks, he stroked his beard, and asked, with a show
of casual interest--

'How was it you knew that Mr. Barfoot?'

'I had met him before--when I went there on the Saturday.'

Widdowson's eyes fell; his brow was wrinkled.

'He's often there, then?'

'I don't know. Perhaps he is. He's Miss Barfoot's cousin, you know.'

'You haven't seen him more than once before?'

'No. Why do you ask?'

'Oh, it was only that he seemed to speak as if you were old
acquaintances.'

'That's his way, I suppose.'

Monica had already learnt that the jealousy which Widdowson so often
betrayed before their manage still lurked in his mind. Perceiving why
he put these questions, she could not look entirely unconcerned, and
the sense of his eye being upon her caused her some annoyance.

'You talked to him, didn't you?' she said, changing her position in the
deep chair.

'Oh, the kind of talk that is possible with a perfect stranger. I
suppose he is in some profession?'

'I really don't know. Why, Edmund? Does he interest you?'

'Only that one likes to know something about the people that are
introduced to one's wife,' Widdowson answered rather acridly.

Their bedtime was half-past ten. Precisely at that moment Widdowson
closed his book--glad to be relieved from the pretence of reading--and
walked over the lower part of the house to see that all was right. He
had a passion for routine. Every night, before going upstairs, he did a
number of little things in unvarying sequence--changed the calendar for
next day, made perfect order on his writing-table, wound lip his watch,
and so on. That Monica could not direct her habits with like exactitude
was frequently a distress to him; if she chanced to forget any most
trivial detail of daily custom he looked very solemn, and begged her to
be more vigilant.

Next morning after breakfast, as Monica stood by the dining-room window
and looked rather cheerlessly at a leaden sky, her husband came towards
her as if he had something to say. She turned, and saw that his face no
longer wore the austere expression which had made her miserable last
night, and even during the meal this morning.

'Are we friends?' he said, with the attempt at playfulness which always
made him look particularly awkward.

'Of course we are,' Monica answered, smiling, but not regarding him.

'Didn't he behave gruffly last night to his little girl?'

'Just a little.'

'And what can the old bear do to show that he's sorry?'

'Never be gruff again.'

'The old bear is sometimes an old goose as well, and torments himself
in the silliest way. Tell him so, if ever he begins to behave badly.
Isn't it account-book morning?'

'Yes. I'll come to you at eleven.'

'And if we have a nice, quiet, comfortable week, I'll take you to the
Crystal Palace concert next Saturday.'

Monica nodded cheerfully, and went off to look after her housekeeping.

The week was in all respects what Widdowson desired. Not a soul came to
the house; Monica went to see no one. Save on two days, it rained,
sleeted, drizzled, fogged; on those two afternoons they had an hour's
walk. Saturday brought no improvement of the atmosphere, but Widdowson
was in his happiest mood; he cheerfully kept his promise about the
concert. As they sat together at night, his contentment overflowed in
tenderness like that of the first days of marriage.

'Now, why can't we always live like this? What have we to do with other
people? Let us be everything to each other, and forget that any one
else exists.'

'I can't help thinking that's a mistake,' Monica ventured to reply.
'For one thing, if we saw more people, we should have so much more to
talk about when we are alone.'

'It's better to talk about ourselves. I shouldn't care if I never again
saw any living creature but you. You see, the old bear loves his little
girl better than she loves him.'

Monica was silent.

'Isn't it true? You don't feel that my company would be enough for you?'

'Would it be right if I ceased to care for every one else? There are my
sisters. I ought to have asked Virginia to come to-morrow; I'm sure she
thinks I neglect her, and it must be dreadful living all alone like she
does.'

'Haven't they made up their mind yet about the school? I'm sure it's
the right thing for them to do. If the venture were to fail, and they
lost money, we would see that they never came to want.'

'They're so timid about it. And it wouldn't be nice, you know, to feel
they were going to be dependent upon us for the rest of their lives. I
had better go and see Virgie to-morrow morning, and bring her back for
dinner.

'If you like,' Widdowson assented slowly. 'But why not send a message,
and ask her to come here?'

'I had rather go. It makes a change for me.'

This was a word Widdowson detested. Change, on Monica's lips, always
seemed to mean a release from his society. But he swallowed his
dissatisfaction, and finally consented to the arrangement.

Virginia came to dinner, and stayed until nightfall. Thanks to her
sister's kindness, she was better clad than in former days, but her
face signified no improvement of health. The enthusiasm with which
Rhoda Nunn had inspired her appeared only in fitful affectations of
interest when Monica pressed her concerning the projected undertaking
