down in Somerset. In general she had a dreamy, reticent look, and
became uncomfortable when any one gazed at her inquiringly. Her talk
was of the most insignificant things; this afternoon she spent nearly
half an hour in describing a kitten which Mrs. Conisbee had given her;
care of the little animal appeared to have absorbed her whole attention
for many days past.

Another visitor to-day was Mr. Newdick, the City clerk who had been
present at Monica's wedding. He and Mrs. Luke Widdowson were the sole
friends of her husband that Monica had seen. Mr. Newdick enjoyed coming
to Herne Hill. Always lugubrious to begin with, he gradually cheered
up, and by the time for departure was loquacious. But he had the oddest
ideas of talk suitable to a drawing-room. Had he been permitted, he
would have held forth to Monica by the hour on the history of the
business firm which he had served for a quarter of a century. This
subject alone could animate him. His anecdotes were as often as not
quite unintelligible, save to people of City experience. For all that
Monica did not dislike the man; he was a good, simple, unselfish
fellow, and to her he behaved with exaggeration of respect.

A few days later Monica had a sudden fit of illness. Her marriage, and
the long open-air holiday, had given her a much healthier appearance
than when she was at the shop; but this present disorder resembled the
attack she had suffered in Rutland Street. Widdowson hoped that it
signified a condition for which he was anxiously waiting. That,
however, did not seem to be the case. The medical man who was called in
asked questions about the patient's mode of life. Did she take enough
exercise? Had she wholesome variety of occupation? At these inquiries
Widdowson inwardly raged. He was tormented with a suspicion that they
resulted from something Monica had said to the doctor.

She kept her bed for three or four days, and on rising could only sit
by the fireside, silent, melancholy. Widdowson indulged his hope,
though Monica herself laughed it aside, and even showed annoyance if he
return to the subject. Her temper was strangely uncertain; some chance
word in a conversation would irritate her beyond endurance, and after
an outburst of petulant displeasure she became obstinately mute. At
other times she behaved with such exquisite docility and sweetness that
Widdowson was beside himself with rapture.

After a week of convalescence, she said one morning,--

'Couldn't we go away somewhere? I don't think I shall ever be quite
well staying here.'

'It's wretched weather,' replied her husband.

'Oh, but there are places where it wouldn't be like this. You don't
mind the expense, do you, Edmund?'

'Expense? Not I, indeed! But--were you thinking of abroad?'

She looked at him with eyes that had suddenly brightened.

'Oh! would it be possible? People do go out of England in the winter.'

Widdowson plucked at his grizzled beard and fingered his watch-chain.
It was a temptation. Why not take her away to some place where only
foreigners and strangers would be about them? Yet the enterprise
alarmed him.

'I have never been out of England,' he said, with misgiving.

'All the more reason why we should go. I think Miss Barfoot could
advise us about it. She has been abroad, I know, and she has so many
friends.'

'I don't see any need to consult Miss Barfoot,' he replied stiffly. 'I
am not such a helpless man, Monica.'

Yet a feeling of inability to grapple with such an undertaking as this
grew on him the more he thought of it. Naturally, his mind busied
itself with such vague knowledge as he had gathered of those places in
the South of France, where rich English people go to escape their own
climate: Nice, Cannes. He could not imagine himself setting forth to
these regions. Doubtless it was possible to travel thither, and live
there when one arrived, without a knowledge of French; but he pictured
all sorts of humiliating situations resulting from his ignorance. Above
everything he dreaded humiliation in Monica's sight; it would be
intolerable to have her comparing him with men who spoke foreign
languages, and were at home on the Continent.

Nevertheless, he wrote to his friend Newdick, and invited him to dine,
solely for the purpose of talking over this question with him in
private. After dinner he broached the subject. To his surprise, Newdick
had ideas concerning Nice and Cannes and such places. He had heard
about them from the junior partner of his firm, a young gentleman who
talked largely of his experiences abroad.

'An immoral lot there,' he said, smiling and shaking his head. 'Queer
goings on.'

'Oh, but that's among the foreigners, isn't it?'

Thereupon Mr. Newdick revealed his acquaintance with English literature.

'Did you ever read any of Ouida's novels?'

'No, I never did.'

'I advise you to before you think of taking your wife over there. She
writes a great deal about those parts. People get mixed up so, it
seems. You couldn't live by yourself. You have to eat at public tables,
and you'd have all sorts of people trying to make acquaintance with
Mrs. Widdowson. They're a queer lot, I believe.'

He abandoned the thought, at once and utterly. When Monica learnt
this--he gave only vague and unsatisfactory reasons--she fell back into
her despondent mood. For a whole day she scarcely uttered a word.

On the next day, in the dreary afternoon, they were surprised by a call
from Mrs. Luke. The widow--less than ever a widow in externals--came in
with a burst of exuberant spirits, and began to scold the moping couple
like an affectionate parent.

'When are you silly young people coming to an end of your honeymoon? Do
you sit here day after day and call each other pretty names? Really
it's very charming in its way. I never knew such an obstinate
case.--Monica, my black-eyed beauty, change your frock, and come with
me to look up the Hodgson Bulls. They're quite too awful; I can't face
them alone; but I'm bound to keep in with them. Be off, and let me
pitch into your young man for daring to refuse my dinner. Don't you
know, sir, that my invitations are like those of Royalty--polite
commands?'

Widdowson kept silence, waiting to see what his wife would do. He could
not with decency object to her accompanying Mrs. Luke, yet hated the
thought of such a step. A grim smile on his face, he sat stiffly,
staring at the wall. To his inexpressible delight, Monica, after a
short hesitation, excused herself; she was not well; she did not feel
able--

'Oh!' laughed the visitor. 'I see, I see! Do just as you like, of
course. But if Edmund has any _nous_'--this phrase she had learnt from
a young gentleman, late of Oxford, now of Tattersall's and
elsewhere--'he won't let you sit here in the dumps. You _are_ in the
dumps, I can see.'

The vivacious lady did not stay long. When she had rustled forth again
to her carriage, Widdowson broke into a paean of amorous gratitude.
What could he do to show how he appreciated Monica's self-denial on his
behalf? For a day or two he was absent rather mysteriously, and in the
meantime made up his mind, after consultation with Newdick, to take his
wife for a holiday in Guernsey.

Monica, when she heard of this project, was at first moderately
grateful, but in a day or two showed by reviving strength and spirits
that she looked forward eagerly to the departure. Her husband
advertised for lodgings in St. Peter Port; he would not face the
disagreeable chances of a hotel. In a fortnight's time all their
preparations were made. During their absence, which might extend over a
month, Virginia was to live at Herne Hill, in supervision of the two
servants.

On the last Sunday Monica went to see her friends in Queen's Road.
Widdowson was ashamed to offer an objection; he much disliked her going
there alone, but disliked equally the thought of accompanying her, for
at Miss Barfoot's he could not pretend to sit, stand, or converse with
ease.

It happened that Mrs. Cosgrove was again calling. On the first occasion
of meeting with Monica this lady paid her no particular attention;
to-day she addressed her in a friendly manner, and their conversation
led to the discovery that both of them were about to spend the ensuing
month in the same place. Mrs. Cosgrove hoped they might occasionally
see each other.

Of this coincidence Monica thought better to say nothing on her return
home. She could not be sure that her husband might not, at the last
moment, decide to stay at Herne Hill rather than incur the risk of her
meeting an acquaintance in Guernsey. On this point he could not be
trusted to exercise common sense. For the first time Monica had a
secret she desired to keep from him, and the necessity was one which
could not but have an unfavourable effect on her manner of regarding
Widdowson. They were to start on Monday evening. Through the day her
mind was divided between joy in the thought of seeing a new part of the
world and a sense of weary dislike for her home. She had not understood
until now how terrible would be the prospect of living here for a long
time with no companionship but her husband's. On the return that
prospect would lie before her. But no; their way of life must somehow
be modified; on that she was resolved.




CHAPTER XVI

HEALTH FROM THE SEA


From Herne Hill to St. Peter Port was a change which made of Monica a
new creature. The weather could not have been more propitious; day
after day of still air and magnificent sky, with temperature which made
a brisk walk at any hour thoroughly enjoyable, yet allowed one to sit
at ease in the midday sunshine. Their lodgings were in the best part of
the town, high up, looking forth over blue sea to the cliffs of Sark.
Widdowson congratulated himself on having taken this step; it was like
a revival of his honeymoon; never since their settling down at home had
Monica been so grateful, so affectionate. Why, his wife was what he had
thought her from the first, perfect in every wifely attribute. How
lovely she looked as she sat down to the breakfast-table, after
breathing sea air at the open windows, in her charming dress, her black
hair arranged in some new fashion just to please him! Or when she
walked with him about the quays, obviously admired by men who passed
them. Or when she seated herself in the open carriage for a drive which
would warm her cheeks and make her lips redder and sweeter.

'Edmund,' she said to him one evening, as they talked by the fireside,
'don't you think you take life rather too gravely?'

He laughed.

'Gravely? Don't I seem to enjoy myself?'

'Oh yes; just now. But--still in a rather serious way. One would think
you always had cares on your mind, and were struggling to get rid of
them.'

'I haven't a care in the world. I am the most blessed of mortals.'

'So you ought to think yourself. But when we get back again, how will
it be? You won't be angry with me? I really don't think I can live
again as we were doing.'

'Not live as--'

His brow darkened; he looked at her in astonishment.

'We ought to have more enjoyment,' she pursued courageously. 'Think of
the numbers of people who live a dull, monotonous life just because
they can't help it. How they would envy us, with so much money to
spend, free to do just what we like! Doesn't it seem a pity to sit
there day after day alone--'

'Don't, my darling!' he implored. 'Don't! That makes me think you don't
really love me.

'Nonsense! I want you to see what I mean. I am not one of the silly
people who care for nothing but amusement, but I do think we might
enjoy our lives more when we are in London. We shan't live for ever,
you know. Is it right to spend day after day sitting there in the
house--'

'But come, come; we have our occupations. Surely it ought to be a
pleasure to you to see that the house is kept in order. There are
duties--'

'Yes, I know. But these duties I could perform in an hour or two.'

'Not thoroughly.'

'Quite thoroughly enough.'

'In my Opinion, Monica, a woman ought never to be so happy as when she
is looking after her home.'

It was the old pedantic tone. His figure, in sympathy with it,
abandoned an easy attitude and became awkward. But Monica would not
allow herself to be alarmed. During the past week she had conducted
herself so as to smooth the way for this very discussion. Unsuspecting
husband!

'I wish to do my duty,' she said in a firm tone, 'but I don't think
it's right to make dull work for oneself, when one might be living. I
don't think it _is_ living to go on week after week like that. If we
were poor, and I had a lot of children to look after as well as all the
housework to do, I believe I shouldn't grumble--at least, I hope I
shouldn't. I should know that I ought to do what there was no one else
to do, and make the best of it. But----'

'Make the best of it!' he interrupted indignantly. 'What an expression
to use! It would not only be your duty, dear, but your privilege!'

'Wait a moment, Edmund. If you were a shopman earning fifteen shillings
a week, and working from early morning to late at night, should you
think it not Only your duty but your privilege?'

He made a wrathful gesture.

'What comparison is there? I should be earning a hard livelihood by
slaving for other people. But a married woman who works in her own
home, for her husband's children--'

'Work is work, and when a woman is overburdened with it she must find
it difficult not to weary of home and husband and children all
together. But of course I don't mean to say that my work is too hard.
All I mean is, that I don't see why any one should _make_ work, and why
life shouldn't be as full of enjoyment as possible.'

'Monica, you have got these ideas from those people at Chelsea. That is
exactly why I don't care for you to see much of them. I utterly
disapprove of--'

'But you are mistaken. Miss Barfoot and Miss Nunn are all for work.
They take life as seriously as you do.'

'Work? What kind of work? They want to make women unwomanly, to make
them unfit for the only duties women ought to perform. You know very
well my opinions about that kind of thing.'

He was trembling with the endeavour to control himself, to speak
indulgently.

'I don't think, Edmund, there's much real difference between men and
women. That is, there wouldn't be, if women had fair treatment.'

'Not much difference? Oh, come; you are talking nonsense. There's as
much difference between their minds as between their bodies. They are
made for entirely different duties.'

Monica sighed.

'Oh, that word Duty!'

Pained unutterably, Widdowson bent forward and took her hand. He spoke
in a tone of the gravest but softest rebuke. She was giving
entertainment to thoughts that would lead her who knew whither, that
would undermine her happiness, would end by making both of them
miserable. He besought her to put all such monstrous speculations out
of her mind.

'Dear, good little wife! Do be guided by your husband. He is older than
you, darling, and has seen so much more of the world.'

'I haven't said anything dreadful, dear. My thoughts don't come from
other people; they rise naturally in my own head.'

'Now, what do you really want? You say you can't live as we were doing.
What change would you make?'

'I should like to make more friends, and to see them often. I want to
hear people talk, and know what is going on round about me. And to read
a different kind of books; books that would really amuse me, and give
me something I could think about with pleasure. Life will be a burden
to me before long if I don't have more freedom.'

'Freedom?'

'Yes, I don't think there's any harm in saying that.'

'Freedom?' He glared at her. 'I shall begin to think that you wish you
had never married me.'

'I should only wish that if I were made to feel that you shut me up in
a house and couldn't trust me to go where I chose. Suppose the thought
took you that you would go and walk about the City some afternoon, and
you wished to go alone, just to be more at ease, should I have a right
to forbid you, or grumble at you? And yet you are very dissatisfied if
I wish to go anywhere alone.'

'But here's the old confusion. I am a man; you are a woman.'

'I can't see that that makes any difference. A woman ought to go about
just as freely as a man. I don't think it's just. When I have done my
work at home I think I ought to be every bit as free as you are--every
bit as free. And I'm sure, Edmund, that love needs freedom if it is to
remain love in truth.'

He looked at her keenly.

'That's a dreadful thing for you to say. So, if I disapprove of your
becoming the kind of woman that acknowledges no law, you will cease to
love me?'

'What law do you mean?'

'Why, the natural law that points out a woman's place, and'--he added,
with shaken voice--'commands her to follow her husband's guidance.'

'Now you are angry. We mustn't talk about it any more just now.'

She rose and poured out a glass of water. Her hand trembled as she
drank. Widdowson fell into gloomy abstraction. Later, as they lay side
by side, he wished to renew the theme, but Monica would not talk; she
declared herself too sleepy, turned her back to him, and soon slept
indeed.

That night the weather became stormy; a roaring wind swept the Channel,
and when day broke nothing could be seen but cloud and rain. Widdowson,
who had rested little, was in a heavy, taciturn mood; Monica, on the
other hand, talked gaily, seeming not to observe her companion's
irresponsiveness. She was glad of the wild sky; now they would see
another aspect of island life--the fierce and perilous surges beating
about these granite shores.

They had brought with them a few books, and Widdowson, after breakfast,
sat down by the fire to read. Monica first of all wrote a letter to her
sister; then, as it was still impossible to go out, she took up one of
the volumes that lay on a side-table in their sitting-room, novels left
by former lodgers. Her choice was something or other with yellow back.
Widdowson, watching all her movements furtively, became aware of the
pictured cover.

'I don't think you'll get much good out of that,' he remarked, after
one or two efforts to speak.

'No harm, at all events,' she replied good-humouredly.

'I'm not so sure. Why should you waste your time? Take "Guy Mannering,"
if you want a novel.'

'I'll see how I like this first.'

He felt himself powerless, and suffered acutely from the thought that
Monica was in rebellion against him. He could not understand what had
brought about this sudden change. Fear of losing his wife's love
restrained him from practical despotism, yet he was very near to
uttering a definite command.

In the afternoon it no longer rained, and the wind had less violence.
They went out to look at the sea. Many people were gathered about the
harbour, whence was a fine view of the great waves that broke into
leaping foam and spray against the crags of Sark. As they stood thus
Occupied, Monica heard her name spoken in a friendly voice--that of
Mrs. Cosgrove.

'I have been expecting to see you,' said the lady. 'We arrived three
days ago.'

Widdowson, starting with surprise, turned to examine the speaker. He
saw a woman of something less than middle age, unfashionably attired,
good-looking, with an air of high spirits; only when she offered her
hand to him did he remember having met her at Miss Barfoot's. To be
graceful in a high wind is difficult for any man; the ungainliness with
which he returned Mrs. Cosgrove's greeting could not have been
surpassed, and probably would have been much the same even had he not,
of necessity, stood clutching at his felt hat.

The three talked for a few minutes. With Mrs. Cosgrove were two
persons, a younger woman and a man of about thirty--the latter a comely
and vivacious fellow, with rather long hair of the orange-tawny hue.
These looked at Monica, but Mrs. Cosgrove made no introduction.

'Come and see me, will you?' she said, mentioning her address. 'One
can't get much in the evenings; I shall be nearly always at home after
dinner, and we have music--of a kind.'

Monica boldly accepted the invitation, said she would be glad to come.
Then Mrs. Cosgrove took leave of them, and walked landwards with her
companions.

Widdowson stood gazing at the sea. There was no misreading his
countenance. When Monica had remarked it, she pressed her lips
together, and waited for what he would say or do. He said nothing, but
presently turned his back upon the waves and began to walk on. Neither
spoke until they were in the shelter of the streets; then Widdowson
asked suddenly,--

'Who _is_ that person?'

'I only know her name, and that she goes to Miss Barfoot's.'

'It's a most extraordinary thing,' he exclaimed in high irritation.
'There's no getting out of the way of those people.'

Monica also was angry; her cheeks, reddened by the wind, grew hotter.

'It's still more extraordinary that you should object so to them.'

'Whether or no--I _do_ object, and I had rather you didn't go to see
that woman.'

'You are unreasonable,' Monica answered sharply. 'Certainly I shall go
and see her.'

'I forbid you to do so! If you go, it will be in defiance of my wish.'

'Then I am obliged to defy your wish. I shall certainly go.'

His face was frightfully distorted. Had they been in a lonely spot,
Monica would have felt afraid of him. She moved hurriedly away in the
direction of their lodgings, and for a few paces he followed; then he
checked himself, turned round about, took an opposite way.

With strides of rage he went along by the quay, past the hotels and the
smaller houses that follow, on to St. Sampson. The wind, again
preparing for a tempestuous night, beat and shook and at moments all
but stopped him; he set his teeth like a madman, and raged on. Past the
granite quarries at Bordeaux Harbour, then towards the wild north
extremity of the island, the sandy waste of L'Ancresse. When darkness
began to fall, no human being was in his range of sight. He stood on
one spot for nearly a quarter of an hour, watching, or appearing to
watch, the black, low-flying scud.

Their time for dining was seven. Shortly before this Widdowson entered
the house and went to the sitting-room; Monica was not there. He found
her in the bed-chamber, before the looking-glass. At the sight of his
reflected face she turned instantly.

'Monica!' He put his hands on her shoulders, whispering hoarsely,
'Monica! don't you love me?'

She looked away, not replying.

'Monica!'

And of a sudden he fell on his knees before her, clasped her about the
waist, burst into choking sobs.

'Have you no love for me? My darling! My dear, beautiful wife! Have you
begun to hate me?'

Tears came to her eyes. She implored him to rise and command himself.

'I was so violent, so brutal with you. I spoke without thinking--'

'But _why_ should you speak like that? Why are you so unreasonable? If
you forbid me to do simple things, with not the least harm in them, you
can't expect me to take it like a child. I shall resist; I can't help
it.'

He had risen and was crushing her in his arms, his hot breath on her
neck, when he began to whisper,--

'I want to keep you all to myself. I don't like these people--they
think so differently--they put such hateful ideas into your mind--they
are not the right kind of friends for you--'

'You misunderstand them, and you don't in the least understand me. Oh,
you hurt me, Edmund!'

He released her body, and took her head between his hands.

'I had rather you were dead than that you should cease to love me! You
shall go to see her; I won't say a word against it. But, Monica, be
faithful, be faithful to me!'

'Faithful to you?' she echoed in astonishment. 'What have I said or
done to put you in such a state? Because I wish to make a few friends
as all women do--'

'It's because I have lived so much alone. I have never had more than
one or two friends, and I am absurdly jealous when you want to get away
from me and amuse yourself with strangers. I can't talk to such people.
I am not suited for society. If I hadn't met you in that strange way,
by miracle, I should never have been able to marry. If I allow you to
have these friends--'

'I don't like to hear that word. Why should you say _allow_? Do you
think of me as your servant, Edmund?'

'You know how I think of you. It is I who am your servant, your slave.'

'Oh, I can't believe that!' She pressed her handkerchief to her cheeks,
and laughed unnaturally. 'Such words don't mean anything. It is you who
forbid and allow and command, and--'

'I will never again use such words. Only convince me that you love me
as much as ever.'

'It is so miserable to begin quarrelling--'

'Never again! Say you love me! Put your arms round my neck--press
closer to me--'

She kissed his cheek, but did not utter a word.

'You can't say that you love me?'

'I think I am always showing it. Do get ready for dinner now; it's past
seven. Oh, how foolish you have been!'

Of course their talk lasted half through the night. Monica held with
remarkable firmness to the position she had taken; a much older woman
might have envied her steadfast yet quite rational assertion of the
right to live a life of her Own apart from that imposed upon her by the
duties of wedlock. A great deal of this spirit and the utterance it
found was traceable to her association with the women whom Widdowson so
deeply suspected; prior to her sojourn in Rutland Street she could not
even have made clear to herself the demands which she now very clearly
formulated. Believing that she had learnt nothing from them, and till
of late instinctively opposing the doctrines held by Miss Barfoot and
Rhoda Nunn, Monica in truth owed the sole bit of real education she had
ever received to those few weeks of attendance in Great Portland
Street. Circumstances were now proving how apt a pupil she had been,
even against her will. Marriage, as is always the case with women
capable of development, made for her a new heaven and a new earth;
perhaps on no single subject did she now think as on the morning of her
wedding-day.

'You must either trust me completely,' she said, 'or not at all. If you
can't and won't trust me, how can I possibly love you?'

'Am I never to advise?' asked her husband, baffled, and even awed, by
this extraordinary revelation of a woman he had supposed himself to
know thoroughly.

'Oh, that's a very different thing from forbidding and commanding!' she
laughed. 'There was that novel this morning. Of course I know as well
as you do that "Guy Mannering" is better; but that doesn't say I am not
to form my opinion of other books. You mustn't be afraid to leave me
the same freedom you have yourself.'

The result of it all was that Widdowson felt his passionate love glow
with new fire. For a moment he thought himself capable of accepting
this change in their relations. The marvellous thought of equality
between man and wife, that gospel which in far-off days will refashion
the world, for an instant smote his imagination and exalted him above
his native level.

Monica paid for the energy she had put forth by a day of suffering. Her
head ached intolerably; she had feverish symptoms, and could hardly
raise herself from the bed. It passed, and she was once more eager to
go forth under the blue sky that followed the tempest.

'Will you go with me to Mrs. Cosgrove's this evening?' she asked of her
husband.

He consented, and after dinner they sought the hotel where their
acquaintance was staying. Widdowson was in extreme discomfort, partly
due to the fact that he had no dress clothes to put on; for far from
anticipating or desiring any such intercourse in Guernsey, he had never
thought of packing an evening suit. Had he known Mrs. Cosgrave this
uneasiness would have been spared him. That lady was in revolt against
far graver institutions than the swallow-tail; she cared not a button
in what garb her visitors came to her. On their arrival, they found, to
Widdowson's horror, a room full of women. With the hostess was that
younger lady they had seen on the quay, Mrs. Cosgrove's unmarried
sister; Miss Knott's health had demanded this retreat from the London
winter. The guests were four--a Mrs. Bevis and her three daughters--all
invalidish persons, the mother somewhat lackadaisical, the girls with a
look of unwilling spinsterhood.

Monica, noteworthy among the gathering for her sweet, bright
prettiness, and the finish of her dress, soon made herself at home; she
chatted gaily with the girls--wondering indeed at her own air of
maturity, which came to her for the first time. Mrs. Cosgrove, an easy
woman of the world when circumstances required it, did her best to get
something out of Widdowson who presently thawed a little.

Then Miss Knott sat down to the piano, and played more than tolerably
well; and the youngest Miss Bevis sang a song of Schubert, with
passable voice but in very distressing German--the sole person
distressed by it being the hostess.

Meanwhile Monica had been captured by Mrs. Bevis, who discoursed to her
on a subject painfully familiar to all the old lady's friends.

'Do you know my son, Mrs. Widdowson? Oh, I thought you had perhaps met
him. You will do so this evening, I hope. He is over here on a
fortnight's holiday.'

'Do you live in Guernsey?' Monica inquired.

'_I_ practically live here, and one of my daughters is always with me.
The other two live with their brother in a flat in Bayswater. Do you
care for flats, Mrs. Widdowson?'

Monica could only say that she had no experience of that institution.

'I do think them such a boon,' pursued Mrs. Bevis. 'They are expensive
but the advantages and comforts are so many. My son wouldn't on any
consideration give up his flat. As I was saying, he always has two of
his sisters to keep house for him. He is quite a young man, not yet
thirty, but--would you believe it?--we are all dependent upon him! My
son has supported the _whole_ of the family for the last six or seven
years, and that by his own work. It sounds incredible, doesn't it? But
for him we should be quite unable to live. The dear girls have very
delicate health; simply impossible for them to exert themselves in any
way. My son has made extraordinary sacrifices on our account. His
desire was to be a professional musician, and every one thinks he would
have become eminent; myself, I am convinced of it--perhaps that is only
natural. But when our circumstances began to grow very doubtful, and we
really didn't know what was before us, my son consented to follow a
business career--that of wine merchant, with which his father was
connected. And he exerted himself so nobly, and gave proof of such
ability, that very soon all our fears were at an end; and now, before
he is thirty, his position is quite assured. We have no longer a care.
I live here very economically--really sweet lodgings on the road to St.
Martin's; I _do_ hope you will come and see me. And the girls go
backwards and forwards. You see we are _all_ here at present. When my
son returns to London he will take the eldest and the youngest with
him. The middle girl, dear Grace--she is thought very clever in
water-colours, and I am quite sure, if it were necessary, she could
pursue the arts in a professional spirit.'

Mr. Bevis entered the room, and Monica recognized the sprightly young
man whom she had seen on the quay. The hostess presented him to her new
friends, and he got into talk with Widdowson. Requested to make music
for the company, he sang a gay little piece, which, to Monica at all
events, seemed one of the most delightful things she had ever heard.

'His own composition,' whispered Miss Grace Bevis, then sitting by Mrs.
Widdowson.

That increased her delight. Foolish as Mrs. Bevis undoubtedly was, she
perchance had not praised her son beyond his merits. He looked the best
of good fellows; so kind and merry and spirited; such a capable man,
too. It struck Monica as a very hard fate that he should have this
family on his hands. What they must cost him! Probably he could not
think of marrying, just on their account.

Mr. Bevis came and took a place by her side.

'Thank you so very much,' she said, 'for that charming song. Is it
published?'

'Oh dear, no!' He laughed and shook his thick hair about. 'It's one of
two or three that I somehow struck out when I was studying in Germany,
ages ago. You play, I hope?'

Monica gave a sad negative.

'Oh, what does it matter? There are hosts of people who will always be
overjoyed to play when you ask them. It would be a capital thing if
only those children were allowed to learn an instrument who showed
genuine talent for music.'

'In that case,' said Monica, 'there certainly wouldn't be hosts of
people ready to play for me.'

'No.' His merry laugh was repeated. 'You mustn't mind when I contradict
myself; it's one of my habits. Are you here for the whole winter?'

'Only a few weeks, unfortunately.'

'And do you dread the voyage back?'

'To tell the truth, I do. I had a very unpleasant time coming.'

'As for myself, how I ever undertake the thing I really don't know. One
of these times I shall die; there's not a shadow of doubt of that. The
girls always have to carry me ashore, one holding me by the hair and
one by the boots. Happily, I am so emancipated that my weight doesn't
distress them. I pick up flesh in a day or two, and then my health is
stupendous--as at present. You see how marvellously _fit_ I look.'

'Yes, you look very well,' replied Monica, glancing at the fair, comely
face.

'It's deceptive. All our family have wretched constitutions. If I go to
work regularly for a couple of months without a holiday, I sink into
absolute decrepitude. An office-chair has been specially made for me,
to hold me up at the desk.--I beg your pardon for this clowning, Mrs.
Widdowson,' he suddenly added in another voice. 'The air puts me in
such spirits. What air it is! Speaking quite seriously, my mother was
saved by coming to live here. We believed her to be dying, and now I
have hopes that she will live ever so many years longer.'

He spoke of his mother with evident affection, glancing kindly towards
her with his blue eyes.

Only once or twice had Monica ventured to exchange a glance with her
husband. It satisfied her that he managed to converse; what his mood
really was could not be determined until afterwards. When they were
about to leave she saw him, to her surprise, speaking quite pleasantly
with Mr. Bevis. A carriage was procured to convey them home, and as
soon as they had started, Monica asked her husband, with a merry look,
how he had enjoyed himself.

'There is not much harm in it,' he replied dryly.

'Harm? How like you, Edmund, to put it that way! Now confess you will
be glad to go again.'

'I shall go if you wish.'

'Unsatisfactory man! You can't bring yourself to admit that it was
pleasant to be among new people. I believe, in your heart, you think
all enjoyment is wrong. The music was nice, wasn't it?'

'I didn't think much of the girl's singing, but that fellow Bevis
wasn't bad.'

Monica examined him as he spoke, and seemed to suppress a laugh.

'No, he wasn't at all bad. I saw you talking with Mrs. Bevis. Did she
tell you anything about her wonderful son?'

'Nothing particular.'

'Oh, then I must tell you the whole story.'

And she did so, in a tone half of jest, half of serious approval.

'I don't see that he has done anything more than his duty,' remarked
Widdowson at the end. 'But he isn't a bad fellow.'

For private reasons, Monica contrasted this attitude towards Bevis with
the disfavour her husband had shown to Mr. Barfoot, and was secretly
much amused.

Two or three days after they went to spend the morning at Petit Bot
Bay, and there encountered with Bevis and his three sisters. The result
was an invitation to go back and have lunch at Mrs. Bevis's lodgings;
they accepted it, and remained with their acquaintances till dusk. The
young man's holiday was at an end; next morning he would face the
voyage which he had depicted so grotesquely.

'And alone!' he lamented to Monica. 'Only think of it. The girls are
all rather below par just now; they had better stay here for the
present.'

'And in London you will be alone too?'

'Yes. It's very sad. I must bear up under it. The worst of it is, I am
naturally subject to depression. In solitude I sink, sink. But the
subject is too painful. Don't let us darken the last hours with such
reflections.'

Widdowson retained his indulgent opinion of the facetious young wine
merchant. He even laughed now and then in recalling some phrase or
other that Bevis had used to him.

Subsequently, Monica had several long conversations with the old lady.
Impelled to gossipy frankness about all her affairs, Mrs. Bevis allowed
it to be understood that the chief reason for two of the girls always
being with their brother was the possibility thus afforded of their
'meeting people'--that is to say, of their having a chance of marriage.
Mrs. Cosgrove and one or two other ladies did them social service.

'They never _will_ marry!' said Monica to her husband, rather
thoughtfully than with commiseration.

'Why not? They are nice enough girls.'

'Yes, but they have no money; and'--she smiled--'people see that they
want to find husbands.'

'I don't see that the first matters; and the second is only natural.'

Monica attempted no rejoinder, but said presently--

'Now they are just the kind of women who ought to find something to do.'

'Something to do? Why, they attend to their mother and their brother.
What could be more proper?'

'Very proper, perhaps. But they are miserable, and always will be.'

'Then they have no _right_ to be miserable. They are doing their duty,
and that ought to keep them cheerful.'

Monica could have said many things, but she overcame the desire, and
laughed the subject aside.




CHAPTER XVII

THE TRIUMPH


Nor till mid-winter did Barfoot again see his friends the
Micklethwaites. By invitation he went to South Tottenham on New Year's
Eve, and dined with them at seven o'clock. He was the first guest that
had entered the house since their marriage.

From the very doorstep Everard became conscious of a domestic
atmosphere that told soothingly upon his nerves. The little servant who
opened to him exhibited a gentle, noiseless demeanour which was no
doubt the result of careful discipline. Micklethwaite himself, who at
once came out into the passage, gave proof of a like influence; his
hearty greeting was spoken in soft tones; a placid happiness beamed
from his face. In the sitting-room (Micklethwaite's study, used for
reception because the other had to serve as dining-room) tempered
lamplight and the glow of a hospitable fire showed the hostess and her
blind sister standing in expectation; to Everard's eyes both of them
looked far better in health than a few months ago. Mrs. Micklethwaite
was no longer so distressingly old; an expression that resembled
girlish pleasure lit up her countenance as she stepped forward; nay, if
he mistook not, there came a gentle warmth to her cheek, and the
momentary downward glance was as graceful and modest as in a youthful
bride. Never had Barfoot approached a woman with more finished
courtesy, the sincere expression of his feeling. The blind sister he
regarded in like spirit; his voice touched its softest note as he held
her hand for a moment and replied to her pleasant words.

No undue indication of poverty disturbed him. He saw that the house had
been improved in many ways since Mrs. Micklethwaite had taken
possession of it; pictures, ornaments, pieces of furniture were added,
all in simple taste, but serving to heighten the effect of refined
comfort. Where the average woman would have displayed pretentious
emptiness, Mrs. Micklethwaite had made a home which in its way was
beautiful. The dinner, which she herself had cooked, and which she
assisted in serving, aimed at being no more than a simple; decorous
meal, but the guest unfeignedly enjoyed it; even the vegetables and the
bread seemed to him to have a daintier flavour than at many a rich
table. He could not help noticing and admiring the skill with which
Miss Wheatley ate without seeing what was before her; had he not known
her misfortune, he would hardly have become aware of it by any
peculiarity as she sat opposite to him.

The mathematician had learnt to sit upon a chair like ordinary mortals.
For the first week or two it must have cost him severe restraint; now
he betrayed no temptation to roll and jerk and twist himself. When the
ladies retired, he reached from the sideboard a box which Barfoot
viewed with uneasiness.

'Do you smoke here--in this room?'

'Oh, why not?'

Everard glanced at the pretty curtains before the windows.

'No, my boy, you do _not_ smoke here. And, in fact, I like your claret;
I won't spoil the flavour of it.'

'As you please; but I think Fanny will be distressed.'

'You shall say that I have abandoned the weed.'

Emotions were at conflict in Micklethwaite's mind, but finally he
beamed with gratitude.

'Barfoot'--he bent forward and touched his friend's arm--'there are
angels walking the earth in this our day. Science hasn't abolished
them, my dear fellow, and I don't think it ever will.'

'It falls to the lot of but few men to encounter them, and of fewer
still to entertain them permanently in a cottage at South Tottenham.'

'You are right.' Micklethwaite laughed in a new way, with scarcely any
sound; a change Everard had already noticed. 'These two sisters--but I
had better not speak about them. In my old age I have become a
worshipper, a mystic, a man of dream and vision.'

'How about worship in a parochial sense?' inquired Barfoot, smiling.
'Any difficulty of that point?'

'I conform, in moderation. Nothing would be asked of me. There is no
fanaticism, no intolerance. It would be brutal if I declined to go to
church on a Sunday morning. You see, my strictly scientific attitude
helps in avoiding offence. Fanny can't understand it, but my lack of
dogmatism vastly relieves her. I have been trying to explain to her
that the scientific mind can have nothing to do with materialism. The
new order of ideas is of course very difficult for her to grasp; but in
time, in time.'

'For heaven's sake, don't attempt conversion!'

'On no account whatever. But I _should_ like her to see what is meant
by perception and conception, by the relativity of time and space--and
a few simple things of that kind!'

Barfoot laughed heartily.

'By-the-bye,' he said, shifting to safer ground, 'my brother Tom is in
London, and in wretched health. _His_ angel is from the wrong quarter,
from the nethermost pit. I seriously believe that she has a plan for
killing her husband. You remember my mentioning in a letter his
horse-accident? He has never recovered from that, and as likely as not
never will. His wife brought him away from Madeira just when he ought
to have stopped there to get well. He settled himself at Torquay,
whilst that woman ran about to pay visits. It was understood that she
should go back to him at Torquay, but this she at length refused to do.
The place was too dull; it didn't suit her extremely delicate health;
she must live in London, her pure native air. If Tom had taken any
advice, he would have let her live just where she pleased, thanking
Heaven that she was at a distance from him. But the poor fellow can't
be away from her. He has come up, and here I feel convinced he will
die. It's a very monstrous thing, but uncommonly like women in general
who have got a man into their power.'

Micklethwaite shook his head.

'You are too hard upon them. You have been unlucky. You know my view of
your duty.'

'I begin to think that marriage isn't impossible for me,' said Barfoot,
with a grave smile.

'Ha! Capital!'

'But as likely as not it will be marriage without forms--imply a free
union.'

The mathematician was downcast.

'I'm sorry to hear that. It won't do. We must conform. Besides, in that
case the person decidedly isn't suitable to you. You of all men must
marry a lady.'

'I should never think of any one that wasn't a lady.'

'Is emancipation getting as far as that? Do ladies enter into that kind
of union?'

'I don't know of any example. That's just why the idea tempts me.'
Barfoot would go no further in explanation.

'How about your new algebra?'

'Alas! My dear boy, the temptation is so frightful--when I get back
home. Remember that I have never known what it was to sit and talk
through the evening with ordinary friends, let alone--It's too much for
me just yet. And, you know, I don't venture to work on Sundays. That
will come; all in good time. I must grant myself half a year of luxury
after such a life as mine has been.'

'Of course you must. Let algebra wait.'

'I think it over, of course, at odd moments. Church on Sunday morning
is a good opportunity.'

Barfoot could not stay to see the old year out, but good wishes were
none the less heartily exchanged before he went. Micklethwaite walked
with him to the railway station; at a few paces' distance from his
house he stood and pointed back to it.
