
'That little place, Barfoot, is one of the sacred spots of the earth.
Strange to think that the house has been waiting for me there through
all the years of my hopelessness. I feel that a mysterious light ought
to shine about it. It oughtn't to look just like common houses.'

On his way home Everard thought over what he had seen and heard,
smiling good-naturedly. Well, that was one ideal of marriage. Not _his_
ideal; but very beautiful amid the vulgarities and vileness of ordinary
experience. It was the old fashion in its purest presentment; the
consecrated form of domestic happiness, removed beyond reach of satire,
only to be touched, if touched at all, with the very gentlest irony.

A life by no means for him. If he tried it, even with a woman so
perfect, he would perish of _ennui_. For him marriage must not mean
repose, inevitably tending to drowsiness, but the mutual incitement of
vigorous minds. Passion--yes, there must be passion, at all events to
begin with; passion not impossible of revival in days subsequent to its
first indulgence. Beauty in the academic sense he no longer demanded;
enough that the face spoke eloquently, that the limbs were vigorous.
Let beauty perish if it cannot ally itself with mind; be a woman what
else she may, let her have brains and the power of using them! In that
demand the maturity of his manhood expressed itself. For casual amour
the odalisque could still prevail with him; but for the life of
wedlock, the durable companionship of man and woman, intellect was his
first requirement.

A woman with man's capability of understanding and reasoning; free from
superstition, religious or social; far above the ignoble weaknesses
which men have been base enough to idealize in her sex. A woman who
would scorn the vulgarism of jealousy, and yet know what it is to love.
This was asking much of nature and civilization; did he grossly deceive
himself in thinking he had found the paragon?

For thus far had he advanced in his thoughts of Rhoda Nunn. If the
phrase had any meaning, he was in love with her; yet, strange complex
of emotions, he was still only half serious in his desire to take her
for a wife, wishing rather to amuse and flatter himself by merely
inspiring her with passion. Therefore he refused to entertain a thought
of formal marriage. To obtain her consent to marriage would mean
nothing at all; it would afford him no satisfaction. But so to play
upon her emotions that the proud, intellectual, earnest woman was
willing to defy society for his sake--ah! that would be an end worth
achieving.

Ever since the dialogue in which he frankly explained his position, and
all but declared love, he had not once seen Rhoda in private. She
shunned him purposely beyond a doubt, and did not that denote a fear of
him justified by her inclination? The postponement of what must
necessarily come to pass between them began to try his patience, as
assuredly it inflamed his ardour. If no other resource offered, he
would be obliged to make his cousin an accomplice by requesting her
beforehand to leave him alone with Rhoda some evening when he had
called upon them.

But it was time that chance favoured him, and his interview with Miss
Nunn came about in a way he could not have foreseen.

At the end of the first week of January he was invited to dine at Miss
Barfoot's. The afternoon had been foggy, and when he set forth there
seemed to be some likelihood of a plague of choking darkness such as
would obstruct traffic. As usual, he went by train to Sloane Square,
purposing (for it was dry under foot, and he could not disregard small
economies) to walk the short distance from there to Queen's Road. On
coming out from the station he found the fog so dense that it was
doubtful whether he could reach his journey's end. Cabs were not to be
had; he must either explore the gloom, with risk of getting nowhere at
all, or give it up and take a train back. But he longed too ardently
for the sight of Rhoda to abandon his evening without an effort. Having
with difficulty made his way into King's Road, he found progress easier
on account of the shop illuminations; the fog, however, was growing
every moment more fearsome, and when he had to turn out of the highway
his case appeared desperate. Literally he groped along, feeling the
fronts of the houses. As under ordinary circumstances he would have had
only just time enough to reach his cousin's punctually, he must be very
late: perhaps they would conclude that he had not ventured out on such
a night, and were already dining without him. No matter; as well go one
way as another now. After abandoning hope several times, and all but
asphyxiated, he found by inquiry of a man with whom he collided that he
was actually within a few doors of his destination. Another effort and
he rang a joyous peal at the bell.

A mistake. It was the wrong house, and he had to go two doors farther
on.

This time he procured admittance to the familiar little hall. The
servant smiled at him, but said nothing. He was led to the
drawing-room, and there found Rhoda Nunn alone. This fact did not so
much surprise him as Rhoda's appearance. For the first time since he
had known her, her dress was not uniform black; she wore a red silk
blouse with a black skirt, and so admirable was the effect of this
costume that he scarcely refrained from a delighted exclamation.

Some concern was visible in her face.

'I am sorry to say,' were her first words, 'that Miss Barfoot will not
be here in time for dinner. She went to Faversham this morning, and
ought to have been back about half-past seven. But a telegram came some
time ago. A thick fog caused her to miss the train, and the next
doesn't reach Victoria till ten minutes past ten.'

It was now half-past eight; dinner had been appointed for the hour.
Barfoot explained his lateness in arriving.

'Is it so bad as that? I didn't know.'

The situation embarrassed both of them. Barfoot suspected a hope on
Miss Nunn's part that he would relieve her of his company, but, even
had there been no external hindrance, he could not have relinquished
the happy occasion. To use frankness was best.

'Out of the question for me to leave the house,' he said, meeting her
eyes and smiling. 'You won't be hard upon a starving man?'

At once Rhoda made a pretence of having felt no hesitation.

'Oh, of course we will dine immediately.' She rang the bell. 'Miss
Barfoot took it for granted that I would represent her. Look, the fog
is penetrating even to our fireside.'

'Cheerful, very. What is Mary doing at Faversham?'

'Some one she has been corresponding with for some time begged her to
go down and give an address to a number of ladies on--a certain
subject.'

'Ah! Mary is on the way to become a celebrity.'

'Quite against her will, as you know.'

They went to dinner, and Barfoot, thoroughly enjoying the abnormal
state of things, continued to talk of his cousin.

'It seems to me that she can't logically refuse to put herself forward.
Work of her kind can't be done in a corner. It isn't a case of "Oh
teach the orphan girl to sew."'

'I have used the same argument to her,' said Rhoda.

Her place at the head of the table had its full effect upon Everard's
imagination. Why should he hold by a resolve of which he did not
absolutely approve the motive? Why not ask her simply to be his wife,
and so remove one element of difficulty from his pursuit? True, he was
wretchedly poor. Marrying on such an income, he would at once find his
freedom restricted in every direction. But then, more likely than not,
Rhoda had determined against marriage, and of him, especially, never
thought for a moment as a possible husband. Well, that was what he
wanted to ascertain.

They conversed naturally enough till the meal was over. Then their
embarrassment revived, but this time it was Rhoda who took the
initiative.

'Shall I leave you to your meditations?' she asked, moving a few inches
from the table.

'I should much prefer your society, if you will grant it me for a
little longer.'

Without speaking, she rose and led the way to the drawingroom. There,
sitting at a formal distance from each other, they talked--of the fog.
Would Miss Barfoot be able to get back at all?

'_A propos_,' said Everard, 'did you ever read "The City of Dreadful
Night"?'

'Yes, I have read it.'

'Without sympathy, of course?'

'Why "of course"? Do I seem to you a shallow optimist?'

'No. A vigorous and rational optimist--such as I myself aim at being.'

'Do you? But optimism of that kind must be proved by some effort on
behalf of society.'

'Precisely the effort I am making. If a man works at developing and
fortifying the best things in his own character, he is surely doing
society a service.'

She smiled sceptically.

'Yes, no doubt. But how do you develop and fortify yourself?'

She was meeting him half-way, thought Everard. Foreseeing the
inevitable, she wished to have it over and done with. Or else--

'I live very quietly,' was his reply, 'thinking of grave problems most
of my time. You know I am a great deal alone.'

'Naturally.'

'No; anything but naturally.'

Rhoda said nothing. He waited a moment, then moved to a seat much
nearer hers. Her face hardened, and he saw her fingers lock together.

'Where a man is in love, solitude seems to him the most unnatural of
conditions.'

'Please don't make me your confidante, Mr. Barfoot,' Rhoda with
well-assumed pleasantry. 'I have no taste for that kind of thing.'

'But I can't help doing so. It is you that I am in love with.'

'I am very sorry to hear it. Happily, the sentiment will not long
trouble you.'

He read in her eyes and on her lips a profound agitation. She glanced
about the room, and, before he could again speak, had risen to ring the
bell.

'You always take coffee, I think?'

Without troubling to give any assent, he moved apart and turned over
some books on the table. For full five minutes there was silence. The
coffee was brought; he tasted it and put his cup down. Seeing that
Rhoda had, as it were, entrenched herself behind the beverage, and
would continue to sip at is as long as might be necessary, he went and
stood in front of her.

'Miss Nunn, I am more serious than you will give me credit for being.
The sentiment, as you call it, has troubled me for some time, and will
last.'

Her refuge failed her. The cup she was holding began to shake a little.

'Please let me put it aside for you.'

Rhoda allowed him to do so, and then locked her fingers.

'I am so much in love with you that I can't keep away from this house
more than a few days at a time. Of course you have known it; I haven't
tried to disguise why I came here so often. It's so seldom that I see
you alone; and now that fortune is kind to me I must speak as best I
can. I won't make myself ridiculous in your eyes--if I can help it. You
despise the love-making of ballrooms and garden parties; so do I, most
heartily. Let me speak like a man who has few illusions to overcome. I
want you for the companion of my life; I don't see very well how I am
to do without you. You know, I think, that I have only a moderate
competence; it's enough to live upon without miseries, that's all one
can say. Probably I shall never be richer, for I can't promise to exert
myself to earn money; I wish to live for other things. You can picture
the kind of life I want you to share. You know me well enough to
understand that my wife--if we use the old word--would be as free to
live in her own way as I to live in mine. All the same, it is love that
I am asking for. Think how you may about man and woman, you know that
there is such a thing as love between them, and that the love of a man
and a woman who can think intelligently may be the best thing life has
to offer them.'

He could not see her eyes, but she was smiling in a forced way, with
her lips close set.

'As you insisted on speaking,' she said at length, 'I had no choice but
to listen. It is usual, I think--if one may trust the novels--for a
woman to return thanks when an offer of this kind has been made to her.
So--thank you very much, Mr. Barfoot.'

Everard seized a little chair that was close by, planted it beside
Rhoda's, there seated himself and took possession of one of her hands.
It was done so rapidly and vehemently that Rhoda started back, her
expression changing from sportive mockery to all but alarm.

'I will have no such thanks,' he uttered in a low voice, much moved, a
smile making him look strangely stern. 'You shall understand what it
means when a man says that he loves you. I have come to think your face
so beautiful that I am in torment with the desire to press my lips upon
yours. Don't be afraid that I shall be brutal enough to do it without
your consent; my respect for you is stronger even than my passion. When
I first saw you, I thought you interesting because of your evident
intelligence--nothing more; indeed you were not a woman to me. Now you
are the one woman in the world; no other can draw my eyes from you.
Touch me with your fingers and I shall tremble--that is what my love
means.'

She was colourless; her lips, just parted, quivered as the breath
panted between them. She did not try to withdraw her hand.

'Can you love me in return?' Everard went on, his face still nearer.
'Am I anything like this to _you_? Have the courage you boast of. Speak
to me as one human being to another, plain, honest words.'

'I don't love you in the least. And if I did I would never share your
life.'

The voice was very unlike her familiar tones. It seemed to hurt her to
speak.

'The reason.--Because you have no faith in me?'

'I can't say whether I have or not. I know absolutely nothing of your
life. But I have my work, and no one shall ever persuade me to abandon
it.'

'Your work? How do you understand it? What is its importance to you?'

'Oh, and you pretend to know me so well that you wish me to be your
companion at every moment!'

She laughed mockingly, and tried to draw away her hand, for it was
burnt by the heat of his. Barfoot held her firmly.

'What _is_ your work? Copying with a type-machine, and teaching others
to do the same--isn't that it?'

'The work by which I earn money, yes. But if it were no more than
that--'

'Explain, then.'

Passion was overmastering him as he watched the fine scorn in her eyes.
He raised her hand to his lips.

'No!' Rhoda exclaimed with sudden wrath. 'Your respect--oh, I
appreciate your respect!'

She wrenched herself from his grasp, and went apart. Barfoot rose,
gazing at her with admiration.

'It is better I should be at a distance from you,' he said. 'I want to
know your mind, and not to be made insensate.'

'Wouldn't it be better still if you left me?' Rhoda suggested, mistress
of herself again.

'If you really wish it.' He remembered the circumstances and spoke
submissively. 'Yet the fog gives me such a good excuse for begging your
indulgence. The chances are I should only lose myself in an inferno.'

'Doesn't it strike you that you take an advantage of me, as you did
once before? I make no pretence of equalling you in muscular strength,
yet you try to hold me by force.'

He divined in her pleasure akin to his own, the delight of conflict.
Otherwise, she would never have spoken thus.

'Yes, it is true. Love revives the barbarian; it wouldn't mean much if
it didn't. In this one respect I suppose no man, however civilized,
would wish the woman he loves to be his equal. Marriage by capture
can't quite be done away with. You say you have not the least love for
me; if you had, should I like you to confess it instantly? A man must
plead and woo; but there are different ways. I can't kneel before you
and exclaim about my miserable unworthiness--for I am not unworthy of
you. I shall never call you queen and goddess--unless in delirium, and
I think I should soon weary of the woman who put her head under my
foot. Just because I am stronger than you, and have stronger passions,
I take that advantage--try to overcome, as I may, the womanly
resistance which is one of your charms.

'How useless, then, for us to talk. If you are determined to remind me
again and again that your strength puts me at your mercy--'

'Oh, not that! I will come no nearer to you. Sit down, and tell me what
I asked.'

Rhoda hesitated, but at length took the chair by which she was standing.

'You are resolved never to marry?'

'I never shall,' Rhoda replied firmly.

'But suppose marriage in no way interfered with your work?'

'It would interfere hopelessly with the best part of my life. I thought
you understood this. What would become of the encouragement I am able
to offer our girls?'

'Encouragement to refuse marriage?'

'To scorn the old idea that a woman's life is wasted if she does not
marry. My work is to help those women who, by sheer necessity, must
live alone--woman whom vulgar opinion ridicules. How can I help them so
effectually as by living among them, one of them, and showing that my
life is anything but weariness and lamentation? I am fitted for this.
It gives me a sense of power and usefulness which I enjoy. Your cousin
is doing the same work admirably. If I deserted I should despise
myself.'

'Magnificent! If I could bear the thought of living without you, I
should bid you persevere and be great.'

'I need no such bidding to persevere.'

'And for that very reason, because you are capable of such things, I
love you only the more.'

There was triumph in her look, though she endeavoured to disguise it.

'Then, for your own peace,' she said, 'I must hope that you will avoid
me. It is so easily done. We have nothing in common, Mr. Barfoot.'

'I can't agree with that. For one thing, there are perhaps not half a
dozen women living with whom I could talk as I have talked with you. It
isn't likely that I shall ever meet one. Am I to make my bow, and
abandon in resignation the one chance of perfecting my life?'

'You don't know me. We differ profoundly on a thousand essential
points.'

'You think so because you have a very wrong idea of me.'

Rhoda glanced at the clock on the mantelpiece.

'Mr. Barfoot,' she said in a changed voice, 'you will forgive me if I
remind you that it is past ten o'clock.'

He sighed and rose.

'The fog certainly cannot be so thick now. Shall I ask them to try and
get you a cab?'

'I shall walk to the station.'

'Only one more word.' She assumed a quiet dignity which he could not
disregard. 'We have spoken in this way for the last time. You will not
oblige me to take all sorts of trouble merely to avoid useless and
painful conversations?'

'I love you, and I can't abandon hope.'

'Then I _must_ take that trouble.' Her face darkened, and she stood in
expectation of his departure.

'I mustn't offer to shake hands,' said Everard, drawing a step nearer.

'I hope you can remember that I had no choice but to be your hostess.'

The face and tone affected him with a brief shame. Bending his head, he
approached her, and held her offered hand, without pressure, only for
an instant.

Then he left the room.

There was a little improvement in the night; he could make his way
along the pavement without actual groping, and no unpleasant adventure
checked him before he reached the station. Rhoda's face and figure went
before him. He was not downcast; for all that she had said, this woman,
soon or late, would yield herself; he had a strange, unreasoning
assurance of it. Perhaps the obstinacy of his temper supplied him with
that confident expectation. He no longer cared on what terms he
obtained her--legal marriage or free union--it was indifferent to him.
But her life should be linked with his if fierce energy of will meant
anything.

Miss Barfoot arrived at half-past eleven, after many delays on her
journey. She was pierced with cold, choked with the poisonous air, and
had derived very little satisfaction from her visit to Faversham.

'What happened?' was her first question, as Rhoda came out into the
hall with sympathy and solicitude. 'Did the fog keep our guest away?'

'No; he dined here.'

'It was just as well. You haven't been lonely.'

They spoke no more on the subject until Miss Barfoot recovered from her
discomfort, and was enjoying a much needed supper.

'Did he offer to go away?'

'It was really impossible. It took him more than half an hour to get
here from Sloane Square.'

'Foolish fellow! Why didn't he take a train back at once?'

There was a peculiar brightness in Rhoda's countenance, and Miss
Barfoot had observed it from the first.

'Did you quarrel much?'

'Not more than was to be expected.'

'He didn't think of staying for my return?'

'He left about ten o'clock.'

'Of course. Quite late enough, under the circumstances. It was very
unfortunate, but I don't suppose Everard cared much. He would enjoy the
opportunity of teasing you.'

A glance told her that Everard was not alone in his enjoyment of the
evening. Rhoda led the talk into other channels, but Miss Barfoot
continued to reflect on what she had perceived.

A few evenings after, when Miss Barfoot had been sitting alone for an
hour or two, Rhoda came to the library and took a place near her. The
elder woman glanced up from her book, and saw that her friend had
something special to say.

'What is it, dear?'

'I am going to tax your good-nature, to ask you about unpleasant
things.'

Miss Barfoot knew immediately what this meant. She professed readiness
to answer, but had an uneasy look.

'Will you tell me in plain terms what it was that your cousin did when
he disgraced himself?'

'Must you really know?'

'I wish to know.'

There was a pause. Miss Barfoot kept her eyes on the page open before
her.

'Then I shall take the liberty of an old friend, Rhoda. Why do you wish
to know?'

'Mr. Barfoot,' answered the other dryly, 'has been good enough to say
that he is in love with me.'

Their eyes met.

'I suspected it. I felt sure it was coming. He asked you to marry him?'

'No, he didn't,' replied Rhoda in purposely ambiguous phrase.

'You wouldn't allow him to?'

'At all events, it didn't come to that. I should be glad if you would
let me know what I asked.'

Miss Barfoot deliberated, but finally told the story of Amy Drake. Her
hands supporting one knee, her head bent, Rhoda listened without
comment, and, to judge from her features, without any emotion of any
kind.

'That,' said her friend at the close, 'is the story as it was
understood at the time--disgraceful to him in every particular. He knew
what was said of him, and offered not a word of contradiction. But not
very long ago he asked me one evening if you had been informed of this
scandal. I told him that you knew he had done something which I thought
very base. Everard was hurt, and thereupon he declared that neither I
nor any other of his acquaintances knew the truth--that he had been
maligned. He refused to say more, and what am I to believe?'

Rhoda was listening with livelier attention.

'He declared that he wasn't to blame?'

'I suppose he meant that. But it is difficult to see--'

'Of course the truth can never be known,' said Rhoda, with sudden
indifference. 'And it doesn't matter. Thank you for satisfying my
curiosity.'

Miss Barfoot waited a moment, then laughed.

'Some day, Rhoda, you shall satisfy mine.'

'Yes--if we live long enough.'

What degree of blame might have attached to Barfoot, Rhoda did not care
to ask herself; she thought no more of the story. Of course there must
have been other such incidents in his career; morally he was neither
better nor worse than men in general. She viewed with contempt the
women who furnished such opportunities; in her judgment of the male
offenders she was more lenient, more philosophical, than formerly.

She had gained her wish, had enjoyed her triumph. A raising of the
finger and Everard Barfoot would marry her. Assured of that, she felt a
new contentment in life; at times when she was occupied with things as
far as possible from this experience, a rush of joy would suddenly fill
her heart, and make her cheek glow. She moved among people with a
conscious dignity quite unlike that which had only satisfied her need
of distinction. She spoke more softly, exercised more patience, smiled
where she had been wont to scoff. Miss Nunn was altogether a more
amiable person.

Yet, she convinced herself, essentially quite unchanged. She pursued
the aim of her life with less bitterness, in a larger spirit, that was
all. But pursued it, and without fear of being diverted from the
generous path.




CHAPTER XVIII

A REINFORCEMENT


Throughout January, Barfoot was endeavouring to persuade his brother
Tom to leave London, where the invalid's health perceptibly grew worse.
Doctors were urgent to the same end, but ineffectually; for Mrs.
Thomas, though she professed to be amazed at her husband's folly in
remaining where he could not hope for recovery, herself refused to
accompany him any whither. This pair had no children. The lady always
spoke of herself as a sad sufferer from mysterious infirmities, and
had, in fact, a tendency to hysteria, which confused itself
inextricably with the results of evil nurture and the impulses of a
disposition originally base; nevertheless she made a figure in a
certain sphere of vulgar wealth, and even gave opportunity to
scandalous tongues. Her husband, whatever his secret thought, would
hear nothing against her; his temper, like Everard's, was marked with
stubbornness, and after a good deal of wrangling he forbade his brother
to address him again on the subject of their disagreement.

'Tom is dying,' wrote Everard, early in February, to his cousin in
Queen's Road. 'Dr. Swain assures me that unless he be removed he cannot
last more than a month or two. This morning I saw the woman'--it was
thus he always referred to his sister-in-law--'and talked to her in
what was probably the plainest language she ever had the privilege of
hearing. It was a tremendous scene, brought to a close only by her
flinging herself on the sofa with shrieks which terrified the whole
household. My idea is that we must carry the poor fellow away by force.
His infatuation makes me rage and curse, but I am bent on trying to
save his life. Will you come and give your help?'

A week later they succeeded in carrying the invalid back to Torquay.
Mrs. Barfoot had abandoned him to his doctors, nurses, and angry
relatives; she declared herself driven out of the house, and went to
live at a fashionable hotel. Everard remained in Devon for more than a
month, devoting himself with affection, which the trial of his temper
seemed only to increase, to his brother's welfare. Thomas improved a
little; once more there was hope. Then on a sudden frantic impulse,
after writing fifty letters which elicited no reply, he travelled in
pursuit of his wife; and three days after his arrival in London he was
dead.

By a will, executed at Torquay, he bequeathed to Everard about a
quarter of his wealth. All the rest went to Mrs. Barfoot, who had
declared herself too ill to attend the funeral, but in a fortnight was
sufficiently recovered to visit one of her friends in the country.

Everard could now count upon an income of not much less than fifteen
hundred a year. That his brother's death would enrich him he had always
foreseen, but no man could have exerted himself with more ardent energy
to postpone that advantage. The widow charged him, wherever she
happened to be, with deliberate fratricide; she vilified his
reputation, by word of mouth or by letter, to all who knew him, and
protested that his furious wrath at not having profited more largely by
the will put her in fear of her life. This last remarkable statement
was made in a long and violent epistle to Miss Barfoot, which the
recipient showed to her cousin on the first opportunity. Everard had
called one Sunday morning--it was the end of March--to say good-bye on
his departure for a few weeks' travel. Having read the letter, he
laughed with a peculiar fierceness.

'This kind of thing,' said Miss Barfoot, 'may necessitate your
prosecuting her. There is a limit, you know, even to a woman's licence.'

'I am far more likely,' he replied, 'to purchase a very nice little
cane, and give her an exemplary thrashing.'

'Oh! Oh!'

'Upon my word, I see no reason against it! That's how I should deal
with a man who talked about me in this way, and none the less if he
were a puny creature quite unable to protect himself. In that furious
scene before we got Tom away I felt most terribly tempted to beat her.
There's a great deal to be said for woman-beating. I am quite sure that
many a labouring man who pommels his wife is doing exactly the right
thing; no other measure would have the least result. You see what comes
of impunity. If this woman saw the possibility that I should give her a
public caning she would be far more careful how she behaved herself.
Let us ask Miss Nunn's opinion.'

Rhoda had that moment entered the room. She offered her hand frankly,
and asked what the subject was.

'Glance over this letter,' said Barfoot. 'Oh, you have seen it. I
propose to get a light, supple, dandyish cane, and to give Mrs. Thomas
Barfoot half a dozen smart cuts across the back in her own
drawing-room, some afternoon when people were present. What have you to
say to it?'

He spoke with such show of angry seriousness that Rhoda paused before
replying.

'I sympathized with you,' she said at length, 'but I don't think I
would go to that extremity.'

Everard repeated the argument he had used to his cousin.

'You are quite right,' Rhoda assented. 'I think many women deserve to
be beaten, and ought to be beaten. But public Opinion would be so much
against _you_.'

'What do I care? So is public opinion against you.'

'Very well. Do as you like. Miss Barfoot and I will come to the police
court and give strong evidence in your favour.'

'Now there's a woman!' exclaimed Everard, not all in jest, for Rhoda's
appearance had made his nerves thrill and his pulse beat. 'Look at her,
Mary. Do you wonder that I would walk the diameter of the globe to win
her love?'

Rhoda flushed scarlet, and Miss Barfoot was much embarrassed. Neither
could have anticipated such an utterance as this. 'That's the simple
truth,' went on Everard recklessly, 'and she knows it, and yet won't
listen to me. Well, good-bye to you both! Now that I have so grossly
misbehaved myself, she has a good excuse for refusing even to enter the
room when I am here. But do speak a word for me whilst I am away, Mary.'

He shook hands with them, scarcely looking at their faces, and abruptly
departed.

The women stood for a moments at a distance from each other. Then Miss
Barfoot glanced at her friend and laughed.

'Really my poor cousin is not very discreet.'

'Anything but,' Rhoda answered, resting on the back of a chair, her
eyes cast down. 'Do you think he will really cane his sister-in-law?'

'How can you ask such a question?'

'It would be amusing. I should think better of him for it.'

'Well, make it a condition. We know the story of the lady and her
glove. I can see you sympathize with her.'

Rhoda laughed and went away, leaving Miss Barfoot with the impression
that she had revealed a genuine impulse. It seemed not impossible that
Rhoda might wish to say to her lover: 'Face this monstrous scandal and
I am yours.

A week passed and there arrived a letter, with a foreign stamp,
addressed to Miss Nunn. Happening to receive it before Miss Barfoot had
come down to breakfast, she put in away in a drawer till evening
leisure, and made no mention of its arrival. Exhilaration appeared in
her behaviour through the day. After dinner she disappeared, shutting
herself up to read the letter.

'DEAR MISS NUNN,--I am sitting at a little marble table outside a cafe
on the Cannibiere. Does that name convey anything to you? The
Cannibiere is the principal street of Marseilles, street of gorgeous
cafe's and restaurants, just now blazing with electric light. You, no
doubt, are shivering by the fireside; here it is like an evening of
summer. I have dined luxuriously, and I am taking my coffee whilst I
write. At a table near to me sit two girls, engaged in the liveliest
possible conversation, of which I catch a few words now and then,
pretty French phrases that caress the ear. One of them is so strikingly
beautiful that I cannot take my eyes from her when they have been
tempted to that quarter. She speaks with indescribable grace and
animation, has the sweetest eyes and lips--

'And all the time I am thinking of some one else. Ah, if _you_ were
here! How we would enjoy ourselves among these southern scenes! Alone,
it is delightful; but with you for a companion, with you to talk about
everything in your splendidly frank way! This French girl's talk is of
course only silly chatter; it makes me long to hear a few words from
your lips--strong, brave, intelligent.

'I dream of the ideal possibility. Suppose I were to look up and see
you standing just in front of me, there on the pavement. You have come
in a few hours straight from London. Your eyes glow with delight.
To-morrow we shall travel on to Genoa, you and I, more than friends,
and infinitely more than the common husband and wife! We have bidden
the world go round for _our_ amusement; henceforth it is our occupation
to observe and discuss and make merry.

'Is it all in vain? Rhoda, if you never love me, my life will be poor
to what it might have been; and you, you also, will lose something. In
imagination I kiss your hands and your lips.

EVERARD BARFOOT.'

There was an address at the head of this letter, but certainly Barfoot
expected no reply, and Rhoda had no thought of sending one. Every
night, however, she unfolded the sheet of thin foreign paper, and read,
more than once, what was written upon it. Read it with external calm,
with a brow of meditation, and afterwards sat for some time in absent
mood.

Would he write again? Her daily question was answered in rather more
than a fortnight. This time the letter came from Italy; it was lying on
the hall table when Rhoda returned from Great Portland Street, and Miss
Barfoot was the first to read the address. They exchanged no remark. On
breaking the envelope--she did so at once--Rhoda found a little bunch
of violets crushed but fragrant.

'These in return for your Cheddar pinks,' began the informal note
accompanying the flowers. 'I had them an hour ago from a pretty girl in
the streets of Parma. I didn't care to buy, and walked on, but the
pretty girl ran by me, and with gentle force fixed the flowers in my
button-hole, so that I had no choice but to stroke her velvety cheek
and give her a lira. How hungry I am for the sight of your face! Think
of me sometimes, dear friend.'

She laughed, and laid the letter and its violets away with the other.

'I must depend on you, it seems, for news of Everard,' said Miss
Barfoot after dinner.

'I can only tell you,' Rhoda answered lightly, 'that he has travelled
from the south of France to the north of Italy, with much observation
of female countenances.'

'He informs you of that?'

'Very naturally. It is his chief interest. One likes people to tell the
truth.'

* * * * * * * * * *

Barfoot was away until the end of April, but after that note from Parma
he did not write. One bright afternoon in May, a Saturday, he presented
himself at his cousin's house, and found two or three callers in the
drawing-room, ladies as usual; one of them was Miss Winifred Haven,
another was Mrs. Widdowson. Mary received him without effusiveness, and
after a few minutes' talk with her he took a place by Mrs. Widdowson,
who, it struck him, looked by no means in such good spirits as during
the early days of her marriage. As soon as she began to converse, his
impression of a change in her was confirmed; the girlishness so
pleasantly noticeable when first he knew her had disappeared, and the
gravity substituted for it was suggestive of disillusion, of trouble.

She asked him if he knew some people named Bevis, who occupied a flat
just above his own.

'Bevis? I have seen the name on the index at the foot of the stairs;
but I don't know them personally.'

'That was how I came to know that _you_ live there,' said Monica. 'My
husband took me to call upon the Bevises, and there we saw your name.
At least, we supposed it was you, and Miss Barfoot tells me we were
right.'

'Oh yes; I live there all alone, a gloomy bachelor. How delightful if
you knocked at my door some day, when you and Mr. Widdowson are again
calling on your friends.'

Monica smiled, and her eyes wandered restlessly.

'You have been away--out of England?' she next said.

'Yes; in Italy.'

'I envy you.'

'You have never been there?'

'No--not yet.'

He talked a little of the agreeables and disagreeables of life in that
country. But Mrs. Widdowson had become irresponsive; he doubted at
length whether she was listening to him, so, as Miss Haven stepped this
way, he took an opportunity of a word aside with his cousin.

'Miss Nunn not at home?'

'No. Won't be till dinner-time.'

'Quite well?'

'Never was better. Would you care to come back and dine with us at
half-past seven?'

'Of course I should.'

With this pleasant prospect he took his leave. The afternoon being
sunny, instead of walking straight to the station, to return home, he
went out on to the Embankment, and sauntered round by Chelsea Bridge
Road. As he entered Sloane Square he saw Mrs. Widdowson, who was coming
towards the railway; she walked rather wearily, with her eyes on the
ground, and did not become aware of him until he addressed her.

'Are we travelling the same way?' he asked. 'Westward?'

'Yes. I am going all the way round to Portland Road.'

They entered the station, Barfoot chatting humorously. And, so intent
was he on the expression of his companion's downcast face, that he
allowed an acquaintance to pass close by him unobserved. It was Rhoda
Nunn, returning sooner than Miss Barfoot had expected. She saw the
pair, regarded them with a moment's keen attentiveness, and went on,
out into the street.

In the first-class carriage which they entered there was no other
passenger as far as Barfoot's station. He could not resist the
temptation to use rather an intimate tone, though one that was quite
conventional, in the hope that he might discover something of Mrs.
Widdowson's mind. He began by asking whether she thought it a good
Academy this year. She had not yet visited it, but hoped to do so on
Monday. Did she herself do any kind of artistic work? Oh, nothing
whatever; she was a very useless and idle person. He believed she had
been a pupil of Miss Barfoot's at one time? Yes, for a very short time
indeed, just before her marriage. Was she not an intimate friend of
Miss Nunn? Hardly intimate. They knew each other a few years ago, but
Miss Nunn did not care much about her now.

'Probably because I married,' she added with a smile.

'Is Miss Nunn really such a determined enemy of marriage?'

'She thinks it pardonable in very weak people. In my case she was
indulgent enough to come to the wedding.'

This piece of news surprised Barfoot.

'She came to your wedding? And wore a wedding garment?'

'Oh yes. And looked very nice.'

'Do describe it to me. Can you remember?'

Seeing that no woman ever forgot the details of another's dress, on
however trivial an occasion, and at whatever distance of time, Monica
was of course able to satisfy the inquirer. Her curiosity excited, she
ventured in turn upon one or two insidious questions.

'You couldn't imagine Miss Nunn in such a costume?'

'I should very much like to have seen her.'

'She has a very striking face--don't you think so?'

'Indeed I do. A wonderful face.'

Their eyes met. Barfoot bent forward from his place opposite Monica.

'To me the most interesting of all faces,' he said softly.

His companion blushed with surprise and pleasure.

'Does it seem strange to you, Mrs. Widdowson?'

'Oh--why? Not at all.'

All at once she had brightened astonishingly. This subject was not
pursued, but for the rest of the time they talked with a new appearance
of mutual confidence and interest, Monica retaining her pretty,
half-bashful smile. And when Barfoot alighted at Bayswater they shook
hands with an especial friendliness, both seeming to suggest a wish
that they might soon meet again.

They did so not later than the following Monday. Remembering what Mrs.
Widdowson had said of her intention to visit Burlington House, Barfoot
went there in the afternoon. If he chanced to encounter the pretty
little woman it would not be disagreeable. Perhaps her husband might be
with her, and in that case he could judge of the terms on which they
stood. A surly fellow, Widdowson; very likely to play the tyrant, he
thought. If he were not mistaken, she had wearied of him and regretted
her bondage--the old story. Thinking thus, and strolling through the
rooms with casual glances at a picture, he discovered his acquaintance,
catalogue in hand, alone for the present. Her pensive face again
answered to his smile. They drew back from the pictures and sat down.

'I dined with our friends at Chelsea on Saturday evening,' said Barfoot.

'On Saturday? You didn't tell me you were going back again.'

'I wasn't thinking of it just at the time.'

Monica hinted an amused surprise.

'You see,' he went on, 'I expected nothing, and happy for me that it
was so. Miss Nunn was in her severest mood; I think she didn't smile
once through the evening. I will confess to you I wrote her a letter
whilst I was abroad, and it offended her, I suppose.'

'I don't think you can always judge of her thoughts by her face.'

'Perhaps not. But I have studied her face so often and so closely. For
all that, she is more a mystery to me than any woman I have ever known.
That, of course, is partly the reason of her power over me. I feel that
if ever--if ever she should disclose herself to me, it would be the
strangest revelation. Every woman wears a mask, except to one man; but
Rhoda's--Miss Nunn's--is, I fancy, a far completer disguise than I ever
tried to pierce.'

Monica had a sense of something perilous in this conversation. It arose
from a secret trouble in her own heart, which she might, involuntarily,
be led to betray. She had never talked thus confidentially with any
man; not, in truth, with her husband. There was no fear whatever of her
conceiving an undue interest in Barfoot; certain reasons assured her of
that; but talk that was at all sentimental gravely threatened her
peace--what little remained to her. It would have been better to
discourage this man's confidences; yet they flattered her so
pleasantly, and afforded such a fruitful subject for speculation, that
she could not obey the prompting of prudence.

'Do you mean,' she said, 'that Miss Nunn seems to disguise her
feelings?'

'It is supposed to be wrong--isn't it?--for a man to ask one woman her
opinion of another.'

'I can't be treacherous if I wished,' Monica replied. 'I don't feel
that I understand her.'

Barfoot wondered how much intelligence he might attribute to Mrs.
Widdowson. Obviously her level was much below that of Rhoda. Yet she
seemed to possess delicate sensibilities, and a refinement of thought
not often met with in women of her position. Seriously desiring her
aid, he looked at her with a grave smile, and asked,--

'Do you believe her capable of falling in love?'

Monica showed a painful confusion. She overcame it, however, and soon
answered.

'She would perhaps try not--not to acknowledge it to herself.'
