
'When, in fact, it had happened?'

'She thinks it so much nobler to disregard such feelings.'

'I know. She is to be an inspiring example to the women who cannot hope
to marry.' He laughed silently. 'And I suppose it is quite possible
that mere shame would withhold her from taking the opposite course.'

'I think she is very strong. But--'

'But?'

He looked eagerly into her face.

'I can't tell. I don't really know her. A woman may be as much a
mystery to another woman as she is to a man.'

'On the whole, I am glad to hear you say that. I believe it. It is only
the vulgar that hold a different opinion.'

'Shall we look at the pictures, Mr. Barfoot?'

'Oh, I am so sorry. I have been wasting your time--'

Nervously disclaiming any such thought, Monica, rose and drew near to
the canvases. They walked on together for some ten minutes, until
Barfoot, who had turned to look at a passing figure, said in his
ordinary voice--

'I think that is Mr. Widdowson on the other side of the room.'

Monica looked quickly round, and saw her husband, as if occupied with
the pictures, glancing in her direction.




CHAPTER XIX

THE CLANK OF THE CHAINS


Since Saturday evening Monica and her husband had not been on speaking
terms. A visit she paid to Mildred Vesper, after her call at Miss
Barfoot's, prolonged itself so that she did not reach home until the
dinner-hour was long past. On arriving, she was met with an outburst of
tremendous wrath, to which she opposed a resolute and haughty silence;
and since then the two had kept as much apart as possible.

Widdowson knew that Monica was going to the Academy. He allowed her to
set forth alone, and even tried to persuade himself that he was
indifferent as to the hour of her return; but she had not long been
gone before he followed. Insufferable misery possessed him. His married
life threatened to terminate in utter wreck, and he had the anguish of
recognizing that to a great extent this catastrophe would be his own
fault. Resolve as he might, he found it impossible to repress the
impulses of jealousy which, as soon as peace had been declared between
them, brought about a new misunderstanding. Terrible thoughts
smouldered in his mind; he felt himself to be one of those men who are
driven by passion into crime. Deliberately he had brooded over a tragic
close to the wretchedness of his existence; he would kill himself, and
Monica should perish with him. But an hour of contentment sufficed to
banish such visions as sheer frenzy. He saw once more how harmless, how
natural, were Monica's demands, and how peacefully he might live with
her but for the curse of suspicion from which he could not free
himself. Any other man would deem her a model wifely virtue. Her care
of the house was all that reason could desire. In her behaviour he had
never detected the slightest impropriety. He believed her chaste as any
woman living She asked only to be trusted, and that, in spite of all,
was beyond his power.

In no woman on earth could he have put perfect confidence. He regarded
them as born to perpetual pupilage. Not that their inclinations were
necessarily wanton; they were simply incapable of attaining maturity,
remained throughout their life imperfect beings, at the mercy of craft,
ever liable to be misled by childish misconceptions. Of course he was
right; he himself represented the guardian male, the wife-proprietor,
who from the dawn of civilization has taken abundant care that woman
shall not outgrow her nonage. The bitterness of his situation lay in
the fact that he had wedded a woman who irresistibly proved to him her
claims as a human being. Reason and tradition contended in him, to his
ceaseless torment.

And again, he feared that Monica did not love him. Had she ever loved
him? There was too much ground for suspecting that she had only yielded
to the persistence of his entreaties, with just liking enough to permit
a semblance of tenderness, and glad to exchange her prospect of
distasteful work for a comfortable married life. Her liking he might
have fostered; during those first happy weeks, assuredly he had done
so, for no woman could be insensible to the passionate worship manifest
in his every look, his every word. Later, he took the wrong path,
seeking to oppose her instincts, to reform her mind, eventually to
become her lord and master. Could he not even now retrace his steps?
Supposing her incapable of bowing before him, of kissing his feet,
could he not be content to make of her a loyal friend, a delightful
companion?

In that mood he hastened towards Burlington House. Seeking Monica
through the galleries, he saw her at length--sitting side by side with
that man Barfoot. They were in closest colloquy. Barfoot bent towards
her as if speaking in an undertone, a smile on his face. Monica looked
at once pleased and troubled.

The blood boiled in his veins. His first impulse was to walk straight
up to Monica and bid her follow him. But the ecstasy of jealous
suffering kept him an observer. He watched the pair until he was
descried.

There was no help for it. Though his brain whirled, and his flesh was
stabbed, he had no choice but to take the hand Barfoot offered him.
Smile he could not, nor speak a word.

'So you have come after all?' Monica was saying to him.

He nodded. On her countenance there was obvious embarrassment, but this
needed no explanation save the history of the last day or two. Looking
into her eyes, he knew not whether consciousness of wrong might be read
there. How to get at the secrets of this woman's heart?

Barfoot was talking, pointing at this picture and that, doing his best
to smooth what he saw was an awkward situation. The gloomy husband,
more like a tyrant than ever, muttered incoherent phrases. In a minute
or two Everard freed himself and moved out of sight.

Monica turned from her husband and affected interest in the pictures.
They reached the end of the room before Widdowson spoke.

'How long do you want to stay here?'

'I will go whenever you like,' she answered, without looking at him.

'I have no wish to spoil your pleasure.'

'Really, I have very little pleasure in anything. Did you come to keep
me in sight?'

'I think we will go home now, and you can come another day.'

Monica assented by closing her catalogue and walking on.

Without a word, they made the journey back to Herne Hill. Widdowson
shut himself in the library, and did not appear till dinner-time. The
meal was a pretence for both of them, and as soon as they could rise
from the table they again parted.

About ten o'clock Monica was joined by her husband in the drawing-room.

'I have almost made up my mind,' he said, standing near her, 'to take a
serious step. As you have always spoken with pleasure of your old home,
Clevedon, suppose we give up this house and go and live there?'

'It is for you to decide.'

'I want to know whether you would have any objection.'

'I shall do as you wish.'

'No, that isn't enough. The plan I have in mind is this. I should take
a good large house--no doubt rents are low in the neighbourhood--and
ask your sisters to come and live with us. I think it would be a good
thing both for them and for you.'

'You can't be sure that they would agree to it. You see that Virginia
prefers her lodgings to living here.'

Oddly enough, this was the case. On their return from Guernsey they had
invited Virginia to make a permanent home with them, and she refused.
Her reasons Monica could not understand; those which she alleged--vague
arguments as to its being better for a wife's relatives not to burden
the husband--hardly seemed genuine. It was possible that Virginia had a
distaste for Widdowson's society.

'I think they both would be glad to live at Clevedon,' he urged,
'judging from your sisters' talk. It's plain that they have quite given
up the idea of the school, and Alice, you tell me, is getting
dissatisfied with her work at Yatton. But I must know whether you will
enter seriously into this scheme.'

Monica kept silence.

'Please answer me.'

'Why have you thought of it?'

'I don't think I need explain. We have had too many unpleasant
conversations, and I wish to act for the best without saying things you
would misunderstand.'

'There is no fear of my misunderstanding. You have no confidence in me,
and you want to get me away into a quiet country place where I shall be
under your eyes every moment. It's much better to say that plainly.'

'That means you would consider it going to prison.'

'How could I help? What other motive have you?'

He was prompted to make brutal declaration of authority, and so cut the
knot. Monica's unanswerable argument merely angered him. But he made an
effort over himself.

'Don't you think it best that we should take some step before our
happiness is irretrievably ruined?'

'I see no need for its ruin. As I have told you before, in talking like
that you degrade yourself and insult me.'

'I have my faults; I know them only too well. One of them is that I
cannot bear you to make friends with people who are not of my kind. I
shall never be able to endure that.'

'Of course you are speaking of Mr. Barfoot.'

'Yes,' he avowed sullenly. 'It was a very unfortunate thing that I
happened to come up just as he was in your company.'

'You are so very unreasonable,' exclaimed Monica tartly. 'What possible
harm is there in Mr. Barfoot, when he meets me by chance in a public
place, having a conversation with me? I wish I knew twenty such men.
Such conversation gives me a new interest in life. I have every reason
to think well of Mr. Barfoot.'

Widdowson was in anguish.

'And I,' he replied, in a voice shaken with angry feeling, 'feel that I
have every reason to dislike and suspect him. He is not an honest man;
his face tells me that. I know his life wouldn't bear inspection. You
can't possibly be as good a judge as I am in such a case. Contrast him
with Bevis. No, Bevis is a man one can trust; one talk with him
produces a lasting favourable impression.'

Monica, silent for a brief space, looked fixedly before her, her
features all but expressionless.

'Yet even with Mr. Bevis,' she said at length, 'you don't make friends.
That is the fault in you which causes all this trouble. You haven't a
sociable spirit. Your dislike of Mr. Barfoot only means that you don't
know him, and don't wish to. And you are completely wrong in your
judgment of him. I have every reason for being sure that you are wrong.'

'Of course you think so. In your ignorance of the world--'

'Which you think very proper in a woman,' she interposed caustically.

'Yes, I do! That kind of knowledge is harmful to a woman.'

'Then, please, how is she to judge her acquaintances?'

'A married woman must accept her husband's opinion, at all events about
men.' He plunged on into the ancient quagmire. 'A man may know with
impunity what is injurious if it enters a woman's mind.'

'I don't believe that. I can't and won't believe it.'

He made a gesture of despair.

'We differ hopelessly. It was all very well to discuss these things
when you could do so in a friendly spirit. Now you say whatever you
know will irritate me, and you say it on purpose to irritate me.'

'No; indeed I do not. But you are quite right that I find it hard to be
friendly with you. Most earnestly I wish to be your friend--your true
and faithful friend. But you won't let me.'

'Friend!' he cried scornfully. 'The woman who has become my wife ought
to be something more than a friend, I should think. You have lost all
love for me--there's the misery.'

Monica could not reply. That word 'love' had grown a weariness to her
upon his lips. She did not love him; could not pretend to love him.
Every day the distance between them widened, and when he took her in
his arms she had to struggle with a sense of shrinking, of disgust. The
union was unnatural; she felt herself constrained by a hateful force
when he called upon her for the show of wifely tenderness. Yet how was
she to utter this? The moment such a truth had passed her lips she must
leave him. To declare that no trace of love remained in her heart, and
still to live with him--that was impossible! The dark foresight of a
necessity of parting from him corresponded in her to those lurid
visions which at times shook Widdowson with a horrible temptation.

'You don't love me,' he continued in harsh, choking tones. 'You wish to
be my _friend_. That's how you try to compensate me for the loss of
your love.'

He laughed with bitterness.

'When you say that,' Monica answered, 'do you ever ask yourself whether
you try to make me love you? Scenes like this are ruining my health. I
have come to dread your talk. I have almost forgotten the sound of your
voice when it isn't either angry or complaining.'

Widdowson walked about the room, and a deep moan escaped him.

'That is why I have asked you to go away from here, Monica. We must
have a new home if our life is to begin anew.'

'I have no faith in mere change of place. You would be the same man. If
you cannot command your senseless jealousy here, you never would
anywhere else.'

He made an effort to say something; seemed to abandon it; again tried,
and spoke in a thick, unnatural voice.

'Can you honestly repeat to me what Barfoot was saying to-day, when you
were on the seat together?'

Monica's eyes flashed.

'I could; every word. But I shall not try to do so.'

'Not if I beseech you to, Monica? To put my mind at rest--'

'No. When I tell you that you might have heard every syllable, I have
said all that I shall.'

It mortified him profoundly that he should have been driven to make so
humiliating a request. He threw himself into a chair and hid his face,
sitting thus for a long time in the hope that Monica would be moved to
compassion. But when she rose it was only to retire for the night. And
with wretchedness in her heart, because she must needs go to the same
chamber in which her husband would sleep. She wished so to be alone.
The poorest bed in a servant's garret would have been thrice welcome to
her; liberty to lie awake, to think without a disturbing presence, to
shed tears of need be--that seemed to her a precious boon. She thought
with envy of the shop-girls in Walworth Road; wished herself back
there. What unspeakable folly she had committed! And how true was
everything she had heard from Rhoda Nunn on the subject of marriage!
The next day Widdowson resorted to an expedient which he had once
before tried in like circumstances. He wrote his wife a long letter,
eight close pages, reviewing the cause of their troubles, confessing
his own errors, insisting gently on those chargeable to her, and
finally imploring her to cooperate with him in a sincere endeavour to
restore their happiness. This he laid on the table after lunch, and
then left Monica alone that she might read it. Knowing beforehand all
that the letter contained, Monica glanced over it carelessly. An answer
was expected, and she wrote one as briefly as possible.

'Your behaviour seems to me very weak, very unmanly. You make us both
miserable, and quite without cause. I can only say as I have said
before, that things will never be better until you come to think of me
as your free companion, not as your bond-woman. If you can't do this,
you will make me wish that I had never met you, and in the end I am
sure it won't be possible for us to go on living together.'

She left this note, in a blank envelope, on the hall table, and went
out to walk for an hour.

It was the end of one more acute stage in their progressive discord. By
keeping at home for a fortnight. Monica soothed her husband and
obtained some repose for her own nerves. But she could no longer affect
a cordial reconciliation; caresses left her cold, and Widdowson saw
that his company was never so agreeable to her as solitude. When they
sat together, both were reading. Monica found more attraction in books
as her life grew more unhappy. Though with reluctance Widdowson had
consented to a subscription at Mudie's, and from the new catalogues she
either chose for herself, necessarily at random, or by the advice of
better-read people, such as she met at Mrs. Cosgrove's. What modern
teaching was to be got from these volumes her mind readily absorbed.
She sought for opinions and arguments which were congenial to her mood
of discontent, all but of revolt.

Sometimes the perusal of a love-story embittered her lot to the last
point of endurance. Before marriage, her love-ideal had been very
vague, elusive; it found scarcely more than negative expression, as a
shrinking from the vulgar or gross desires of her companions in the
shop. Now that she had a clearer understanding of her own nature, the
type of man correspondent to her natural sympathies also became clear.
In every particular he was unlike her husband. She found a suggestion
of him in books; and in actual life, already, perhaps something more
than a suggestion. Widdowson's jealousy, in so far as it directed
itself against her longing for freedom, was fully justified; this
consciousness often made her sullen when she desired to express a
nobler indignation; but his special prejudice led him altogether
astray, and in free resistance on this point she found the relief which
enabled her to bear a secret self-reproach. Her refusal to repeat the
substance of Barfoot's conversation was, in some degree, prompted by a
wish for the continuance of his groundless fears. By persevering in
suspicion of Barfoot, he afforded her a firm foothold in their
ever-renewed quarrels.

A husband's misdirected jealousy excites in the wife derision and a
sense of superiority; more often than not, it fosters an unsuspected
attachment, prompts to a perverse pleasure in misleading. Monica became
aware of this; in her hours of misery she now and then gave a harsh
laugh, the result of thoughts not seriously entertained, but tempting
the fancy to recklessness. What, she asked herself again, would be the
end of it all? Ten years hence, would she have subdued her soul to a
life of weary insignificance, if not of dishonour? For it was dishonour
to live with a man she could not love, whether her heart cherished
another image or was merely vacant. A dishonour to which innumerable
women submitted, a dishonour glorified by social precept, enforced
under dread penalties.

But she was so young, and life abounds in unexpected changes.




CHAPTER XX

THE FIRST LIE


Mrs. Cosgrove was a childless widow, with sufficient means and a very
mixed multitude of acquaintances. In the general belief her marriage
had been a happy one; when she spoke of her deceased husband it was
with respect, and not seldom with affection. Yet her views on the
matrimonial relation were known to be of singular audacity. She
revealed them only to a small circle of intimates; most of the people
who frequented her house had no startling theories to maintain, and
regarded their hostess as a good-natured, rather eccentric woman, who
loved society and understood how to amuse her guests.

Wealth and position were rarely represented in her drawing-room; nor,
on the other hand, was Bohemianism. Mrs. Cosgrove belonged by birth and
marriage to the staid middle class, and it seemed as if she made it her
object to provide with social entertainment the kind of persons who, in
an ordinary way, would enjoy very little of it. Lonely and impecunious
girls or women were frequently about her; she tried to keep them in
good spirits, tried to marry them if marriage seemed possible, and, it
was whispered, used a good deal of her income for the practical benefit
of those who needed assistance. A sprinkling of maidens who were
neither lonely nor impecunious served to attract young men, generally
strugglers in some profession or other, on the lookout for a wife.
Intercourse went on with a minimum of formalities. Chaperonage--save
for that represented by the hostess herself--was as often as not
dispensed with.

'We want to get rid of a lot of sham propriety'--so she urged to her
closer friends. 'Girls must learn to trust themselves, and look out for
dangers. If a girl can only be kept straight by incessant watchfulness,
why, let her go where she will, and learn by experience. In fact, I
want to see experience substituted for precept.'

Between this lady and Miss Barfoot there were considerable divergences
of opinion, yet they agreed on a sufficient number of points to like
each other very well. Occasionally one of Mrs. Cosgrove's _protegees_
passed into Miss Barfoot's hands, abandoning the thought of matrimony
for study in Great Portland Street. Rhoda Nunn, also, had a liking for
Mrs. Cosgrove, though she made no secret of her opinion that Mrs.
Cosgrove's influence was on the whole decidedly harmful.

'That house,' she once said to Miss Barfoot, 'is nothing more than a
matrimonial agency.'

'But so is every house where many people are entertained.'

'Not in the same way. Mrs. Cosgrove was speaking to me of some girl who
has just accepted an offer of marriage. "I don't think they'll suit
each other," she said, "but there's no harm in trying."'

Miss Barfoot could not restrain a laugh.

'Who knows? Perhaps she is right in that view of things. After all, you
know, it's only putting into plain words what everybody thinks on all
but every such occasion.'

'The first part of her remark--yes,' said Rhoda caustically. 'But as
for the "no harm in trying," well, let us ask the wife's opinion in a
year's time.'

* * * * * * * * * *

Midway in the London season on Sunday afternoon, about a score of
visitors were assembled in Mrs. Cosgrove's drawing-rooms--there were
two of them, with a landing between. As usual, some one sat at the
piano, but a hum of talk went on as undercurrent to the music.
Downstairs, in the library, half a dozen people found the quietness
they preferred, and among these was Mrs. Widdowson. She had an album of
portraits on her lap; whilst turning them over, she listened to a chat
going on between the sprightly Mr. Bevis and a young married woman who
laughed ceaselessly at his jokes. It was only a few minutes since she
had come down from the drawing-room. Presently her eyes encountered a
glance from Bevis, and at once he stepped over to a seat beside her.

'Your sisters are not here to-day?' she said.

'No. They have guests of their own. And when are you coming to see them
again?'

'Before long, I hope.'

Bevis looked away and seemed to reflect.

'Do come next Saturday--could you?'

'I had better not promise.'

'Do try, and'--he lowered his voice--'come alone. Forgive me for saying
that. The girls are rather afraid of Mr. Widdowson, that's the truth.
They would so like a free gossip with you. Let me tell them to expect
you about half-past three or four. They will rise up and call me
blessed.'

Laughing, Monica at length agreed to come if circumstances were
favourable. Her talk with Bevis continued for a long time, until people
had begun to leave. Some other acquaintance then claimed her, but she
was now dull and monosyllabic, as if conversation had exhausted her
energies. At six o'clock she stole away unobserved, and went home.

Widdowson had resigned himself, in appearance at all events, to these
absences. It was several weeks since he had accompanied his wife to
call upon any one; a sluggishness was creeping over him, strengthening
his disinclination for society. The futile endeavour to act with
decision, to carry Monica away into Somerset, resulted, as futile
efforts of that kind are wont to do, in increased feebleness of the
will; he was less capable than ever of exerting the authority which he
still believed himself to keep for the last resort. Occasionally some
days went by without his leaving the house. Instead of the one daily
newspaper he had been used to take he now received three; after
breakfast he sometimes spent a couple of hours over the _Times_, and
the evening papers often occupied him from dinner to bedtime. Monica
noticed, with a painful conflict of emotions, that his hair had begun
to lose its uniform colour, and to show streaks that matched with his
grizzled beard. Was _she_ responsible for this?

On the Saturday when she was to visit the Bevises she feared lest he
should propose to go with her. She wished even to avoid the necessity
of telling him where she was going. As she rose from luncheon Widdowson
glanced at her.

'I've ordered the trap, Monica. Will you come for a drive?'

'I have promised to go into the town. I'm very sorry.'

'It doesn't matter.'

This was his latest mode of appealing to her--with an air of pained
resignation.

'For a day or two I haven't felt at all well,' he continued gloomily.
'I thought a drive might do me good.'

'Certainly. I hope it will. When would you like to have dinner?'

'I never care to alter the hours. Of course I shall be back at the
usual time. Shall _you_ be?'

'Oh yes--long before dinner.'

So she got away without any explanation. At a quarter to four she
reached the block of flats in which the Bevises (and Everard Barfoot)
resided. With a fluttering of the heart, she went very quietly
upstairs, as if anxious that her footsteps should not be heard; her
knock at the door was timid.

Bevis in person opened to her.

'Delighted! I thought it _might_ be--'

She entered, and walked into the first room, where she had been once
before. But to her surprise it was vacant. She looked round and saw
Bevis's countenance gleaming with satisfaction.

'My sisters will be here in a few minutes,' he said. 'A few minutes at
most. Will you take this chair, Mrs. Widdowson? How delighted I am that
you were able to come!'

So perfectly natural was his manner, that Monica, after the first
moment of consternation, tried to forget that there was anything
irregular in her presence here under these circumstances. As regards
social propriety, a flat differs in many respects from a house. In an
ordinary drawing-room, it could scarcely have mattered if Bevis
entertained her for a short space until his sisters' arrival; but in
this little set of rooms it was doubtfully permissible for her to sit
_tete-a-tete_ with a young man, under any excuse. And the fact of his
opening the front door himself seemed to suggest that not even a
servant was in the flat. A tremor grew upon her as she talked, due in
part to the consciousness that she was glad to be thus alone with Bevis.

'A place like this must seem to you to be very unhomelike,' he was
saying, as he lounged on a low chair not very far from her. 'The girls
didn't like it at all at first. I suppose it's a retrograde step in
civilization. Servants are decidedly of that opinion; we have a great
difficulty in getting them to stay here. The reason seems to me that
they miss the congenial gossip of the area door. At this moment we are
without a domestic. I found she compensated herself for disadvantages
by stealing my tobacco and cigars. She went to work with such a lack of
discretion--abstracting half a pound of honeydew at a time--that I
couldn't find any sympathy for her. Moreover, when charged with the
delinquency, she became abusive, so very abusive that we were obliged
to insist upon her immediate departure.'

'Do you think she smoked?' asked Monica laughingly.

'We have debated that point with much interest. She was a person of
advanced ideas, as you see; practically a communist. But I doubt
whether honeydew had any charms for her personally. It seems more
probable that some milkman, or baker's assistant, or even metropolitan
policeman, benefited by her communism.'

Indifferent to the progress of time, Bevis talked on with his usual
jocoseness, now and then shaking his tawny hair in a fit of laughter
the most contagious.

'But I have something to tell you,' he said at length more seriously.
'I am going to leave England. They want me to live at Bordeaux for a
tune, two or three years perhaps. It's a great bore, but I shall have
to go. I am not my own master.'

'Then your sisters will go to Guernsey?'

'Yes. I dare say I shall leave about the end of July.'

He became silent, looking at Monica with humorous sadness.

'Do you think your sisters will soon be here, Mr. Bevis?' Monica asked,
with a glance round the room.

'I think so. Do you know, I did a very silly thing. I wanted your visit
(if you came) to be a surprise for them, and so--in fact, I said
nothing about it. When I got here from business, a little before three,
they were just going out. I asked them if they were sure they would be
back in less than an hour. Oh, they were quite sure--not a doubt about
it. I do hope they haven't altered their mind, and gone to call
somewhere. But, Mrs. Widdowson, I am going to make you a cup of
tea--with my own fair hands, as the novelist say.'

Monica begged that he would not trouble. Under the circumstances she
had better not stay. She would come again very soon.

'No, I can't, I can't let you go!' Bevis exclaimed, softening his gay
tone as he stood before her. 'How shall I entreat you? If you knew what
an unforgettable delight it will be to me to make you a cup of tea! I
shall think of it at Bordeaux every Saturday.'

She had risen, but exhibited no immutable resolve.

'I really must go, Mr. Bevis--!'

'Don't drive me to despair. I am capable of turning my poor sisters out
of house and home--flat and home, I mean--in anger at their delay. On
their account, in pity for their youth, do stay, Mrs. Widdowson!
Besides, I have a new song that I want you to bear--words and music my
own. One little quarter of an hour! And I know the girls will be here
directly.'

His will, and her inclination, prevailed. Monica sat down again, and
Bevis disappeared to make the tea. Water must have been already
boiling, for in less than five minutes the young man returned with a
tray, on which all the necessaries were neatly arranged. With merry
homage he waited upon his guest. Monica's cheeks were warm. After the
vain attempt to release herself from what was now distinctly a
compromising situation, she sat down in an easier attitude than before,
as though resolved to enjoy her liberty whilst she might. There was a
suspicion in her mind that Bevis had arranged this interview; she
doubted the truth of his explanation. And indeed she hoped that his
sisters would not return until after her departure; it would be very
embarrassing to meet them.

Whilst talking and listening, she silently defended herself against the
charge of impropriety. What wrong was she committing? What matter that
they were alone? Their talk was precisely what it might have been in
other people's presence. And Bevis, such a frank, good-hearted fellow,
could not by any possibility fail in respect to her. The objections
were all cant, and cant of the worst kind. She would not be a slave of
such ignoble prejudices.

'You haven't made Mr. Barfoot's acquaintance yet?' she asked.

'No, I haven't. There seems to have been no opportunity. Did you
seriously wish me to know him?'

'Oh, I had no wish in the matter at all.'

'You like Mr. Barfoot?'

'I think him very pleasant.'

'How delightful to be praised by you, Mrs. Widdowson! Now if any one
speaks to you about _me_, when I have left England, will you find some
nice word? Don't think me foolish. I do so desire the good opinion of
my friends. To know that you spoke of me as you did for Mr. Barfoot
would give me a whole day of happiness.'

'How enviable! To be so easily made happy.'

'Now let me sing you this song of mine. It isn't very good; I haven't
composed for years. But--'

He sat down and rattled over the keys. Monica was expecting a lively
air and spirited words, as in the songs she had heard at Guernsey; but
this composition told of sadness and longing and the burden of a lonely
heart. She thought it very beautiful, very touching. Bevis looked round
to see the effect it produced upon her, and she could not meet his eyes.

'Quite a new sort of thing for me, Mrs. Widdowson. Does it strike you
as so very bad?'

'No--not at all.'

'But you can't honestly praise it?' He sighed, in dejection. 'I meant
to give you a copy. I made this one specially for you, and--if you will
forgive me--I have taken the liberty of dedicating it to you.
Songwriters do that, you know. Of course it is altogether unworthy of
your acceptance--'

'No--no--indeed I am very grateful to you, Mr. Bevis. Do give it to
me--as you meant to.'

'You will have it?' he cried delightedly. 'Now for a triumphal march!'

Whilst he played, with look corresponding to the exultant strain,
Monica rose from her chair. She stood with eyes downcast and lips
pressed together. When the last chord had sounded,--

'Now I must say good-bye, Mr. Bevis. I am so sorry your sisters haven't
come.'

'So am I--and yet I am not. I have enjoyed the happiest half-hour of my
life.'

'Will you give me the piece of music?'

'Let me roll it up. There; it won't be very awkward to carry. But of
course I shall see you again before the end of July? You will come some
other afternoon?'

'If Miss Bevis will let me know when she is quite sure--'

'Yes, she shall. Do you know, I don't think I shall say a word about
what has happened this afternoon. Will you allow me to keep silence
about your call, Mrs. Widdowson? They would be so annoyed--and really
it was a silly thing not to tell them--'

Monica gave no verbal reply. She looked towards the door. Bevis stepped
forward, and held it open.

'Good-bye, then. You know what I told you about my tendency to low
spirits. I'm going to have a terrible turn--down, down, down!'

She laughed, and offered her hand. He held it very lightly, looking at
her with his blue eyes, which indeed expressed a profound melancholy.

'Thank you,' he murmured. 'Thank you for your great kindness.'

And thereupon he opened the front door for her. Without another look
Monica went quickly down the stairs; she appreciated his motive for not
accompanying her to the exit.

* * * * * * * * * *

Before entering the house she had managed to conceal the sheet of music
which she was carrying. But, happily, Widdowson was still absent. Half
an hour passed--half an hour of brooding and reverie--before she heard
his footstep ascending the stairs. On the landing she met him with a
pleasant smile.

'Have you enjoyed your drive?'

'Pretty well.'

'And do you feel better?'

'Not much, dear. But it isn't worth talking about.'

Later, he inquired where she had been.

'I had an appointment with Milly Vesper.'

The first falsehood she had ever told him, and yet uttered with such
perfect assumption of sincerity as would have deceived the acutest
observer. He nodded, discontented as usual, but entertaining no doubt.

And from that moment she hated him. If he had plied her with
interrogations, if he had seemed to suspect anything, the burden of
untruth would have been more endurable. His simple acceptance of her
word was the sternest rebuke she could have received. She despised
herself, and hated him for the degradation which resulted from his
lordship over her.




CHAPTER XXI

TOWARDS THE DECISIVE


Mary Barfoot had never suffered from lack of interest in life. Many a
vivid moment dwelt in her memory; joys and sorrows, personal or of
larger scope, affected her the more deeply because of that ruling
intelligence which enabled her to transmute them into principles. No
longer anticipating or desiring any great change in her own
environment, in the modes and motives of her activity, she found it a
sufficient happiness to watch, and when possible to direct, the
tendency of younger lives. So kindly had nature tempered her
disposition, that already she had been able to outlive those fervours
of instinct which often make the middle life of an unwedded woman one
long repining; but her womanly sympathies remained. And at present
there was going forward under her own roof, within her daily
observation, a comedy, a drama, which had power to excite all her
disinterested emotions. It had been in progress for twelve months, and
now, unless she was strangely mistaken, the _denouement_ drew very near.

For all her self-study, her unflinching recognition of physical and
psychical facts which the average woman blinks over, Mary deceived
herself as to the date of that final triumph which permitted her to
observe Rhoda Nunn with perfect equanimity. Her outbreak of angry
feeling on the occasion of Bella Royston's death meant something more
than she would acknowledge before the inquisition of her own mind. It
was just then that she had become aware of Rhoda's changing attitude
towards Everard Barfoot; trifles such as only a woman would detect had
convinced her that Everard's interest in Rhoda was awakening a serious
response; and this discovery, though it could not surprise her, caused
an obscure pang which she attributed to impersonal regret, to mere
natural misgiving. For some days she thought of Rhoda in an ironic,
half-mocking spirit. Then came Bella's suicide, and the conversation in
which Rhoda exhibited a seeming heartlessness, the result, undoubtedly,
of grave emotional disturbance. To her own astonishment, Mary was
overcome with an impulse of wrathful hostility, and spoke words which
she regretted as soon as they had passed her lips.

Poor Bella had very little to do with this moment of discord between
two women who sincerely liked and admired each other. She only offered
the occasion for an outburst of secret feeling which probably could not
have been avoided. Mary Barfoot had loved her cousin Everard; it began
when he was one-and-twenty; she, so much older, had never allowed
Everard or any one else to suspect her passion, which made her for two
or three years more unhappy than she had ever been, or was ever to be
when once her strong reason had prevailed. The scandal of Amy Drake,
happening long after, revived her misery, which now took the form of
truly feminine intolerance; she tried to believe that Everard was
henceforth of less than no account to her, that she detested him for
his vices. Amy Drake, however, she detested much more.

When her friendship with Rhoda Nunn had progressed to intimacy, she
could not refrain from speaking of her cousin Everard, absent at the
ends of the earth, and perchance lost to her sight for ever. Her
mention of him was severe, yet of a severity so obviously blended with
other feeling, that Rhoda could not but surmise the truth. Sentimental
confession never entered Miss Barfoot's mind; she had conquered her
desires, and was by no means inclined to make herself ridiculous; Rhoda
Nunn, of all women, seemed the least likely to make remarks, or put
questions, such as would endanger a betrayal of the buried past. Yet,
at a later time, when pressing the inquiry whether Rhoda had ever been
in love, Mary did not scruple to suggest that her own knowledge in that
direction was complete. She did it in lightness of heart, secure under
the protection of her forty years. Rhoda, of course, understood her as
referring to Everard.

So the quarrel was one of jealousy. But no sooner had it taken place
when Mary Barfoot experienced a shame, a distress, which in truth
signified the completion of self-conquest. She thought herself ashamed
of being angry where anger was uncalled for; in reality, she chastised
herself for the last revival of a conflict practically over and done
with so many years ago. And on this very account, precisely because she
was deceiving herself as to her state of mind, she prolonged the
painful situation. She said to herself that Rhoda had behaved so
wrongly that displeasure was justified, that to make up the quarrel at
once would be unwise, for Miss Nunn needed a little discipline. This
insistence upon the side issue helped her to disregard the main one,
and when at length she offered Rhoda the kiss of reconcilement, that
also signified something other than was professed. It meant a hope that
Rhoda might know the happiness which to her friend had been denied.

Everard's announcement of his passion for Miss Nunn seemed to Mary a
well-calculated piece of boldness. If he seriously sought Rhoda for his
wife, this frank avowal of the desire before a third person might
remove some of the peculiar difficulties of the case. Whether willing
or not to be wooed, Rhoda, in mere consistency with her pronounced
opinions, must needs maintain a scornful silence on the subject of
Everard's love-making; by assailing this proud reserve, this dignity
which perchance had begun to burden its supporter, Everard made
possible, if not inevitable, a discussion of his suit between the two
women. She who talks of her lover will be led to think of him.

Miss Barfoot knew not whether to hope for the marriage of this strange
pair. She was distrustful of her cousin, found it hard to imagine him a
loyal husband, and could not be sure whether Rhoda's qualities were
such as would ultimately retain or repel him. She inclined to think
this wooing a mere caprice. But Rhoda gave ear to him, of that there
could be little doubt; and since his inheritance of ample means the
affair began to have a new aspect. That Everard persevered, though the
world of women was now open to him--for, on a moderate computation, any
man with Barfoot's personal advantages, and armed with fifteen hundred
a year, may choose among fifty possible maidens--seemed to argue that
he was really in love. But what it would cost Rhoda to appear before
her friends in the character of a bride! What a humbling of her glory!

Was she capable of the love which defies all humiliation? Or, loving
ardently, would she renounce a desired happiness from dread of female
smiles and whispers? Or would it be her sufficient satisfaction to
reject a wealthy suitor, and thus pose more grandly than ever before
the circle who saw in her an example of woman's independence? Powerful
was the incitement to curiosity in a situation which, however it ended,
would afford such matter for emotional hypothesis.

They did not talk of Everard. Whether Rhoda replied to his letters from
abroad Miss Barfoot had no means of ascertaining. But after his return
he had a very cold reception--due, perhaps, to some audacity he had
allowed himself in his correspondence. Rhoda again avoided meeting with
him, and, as Miss Barfoot noticed, threw herself with increased energy
into all her old pursuits.

'What about your holiday this year?' Mary asked one evening in June.
'Shall you go first, or shall I?'

'Please make whatever arrangements you like.'

Miss Barfoot had a reason for wishing to postpone her holiday until
late in August. She said so, and proposed that Rhoda should take any
three weeks she liked prior to that.

'Miss Vesper,' she added, 'can manage your room very well. We shall be
much more at ease in that respect than last year.'

'Yes. Miss Vesper is getting to be very useful and trustworthy.'

Rhoda mused when she had made this remark.

'Do you know,' she asked presently, 'whether she sees much of Mrs.
Widdowson?'

'I have no idea.'

They decided that Rhoda should go away at the close of July. Where was
her holiday to be spent? Miss Barfoot suggested the lake country.

'I was thinking of it myself,' said Rhoda. 'I should like to have some
sea-bathing, though. A week by the shore, and then the rest of the time
spent in vagabondage among the mountains, would suit me very well. Mrs.
Cosgrove is at home in Cumberland; I must ask her advice.'

This was done, and there resulted a scheme which seemed to excite Rhoda
with joyous anticipation. On the coast of Cumberland, a few miles south
of St. Bees, is a little place called Seascale, unknown to the ordinary
tourist, but with a good hotel and a few scattered houses where
lodgings can be obtained. Not far away rise the mountain barriers of
lake-land, Wastdale clearly discernible. At Seascale, then, Rhoda would
spend her first week, the quiet shore with its fine stretch of sand
affording her just the retreat that she desired.

'There are one or two bathing-machines, Mrs. Cosgrove says, but I hope
to avoid such abominations. How delicious it was in one's childhood,
when one ran into the sea naked! I will enjoy that sensation once more,
if I have to get up at three in the morning.'

About this time Barfoot made one of his evening calls. He had no hope
of seeing Rhoda, and was agreeably surprised by her presence in the
drawing-room. Just as happened a year ago, the subject of Miss Barfoot
making a direct inquiry. With lively interest, Mary waited for the
reply, and was careful not to smile when Rhoda made known her
intentions.

'Have you planned a route after your stay at Seascale?' Barfoot asked.

'No. I shall do that when I am there.'

Whether or not he intended a contrast to these homely projects, Barfoot
presently began to talk of travel on a grander scale. When he next left
England, he should go by the Orient Express right away to
Constantinople. His cousin asked questions about the Orient Express,
and he supplied her with details very exciting to the imagination of
any one who longs to see the kingdoms of the earth--as undoubtedly
Rhoda did. The very name, Orient Express, has a certain sublimity, such
as attaches, more or less, to all the familiar nomenclature of
world-transits. He talked himself into fervour, and kept a watch on
Rhoda's countenance. As also did Miss Barfoot. Rhoda tried to appear
unaffected, but her coldness betrayed its insincerity.

The next day, when work at Great Portland Street was just finished, she
fell into conversation with Mildred Vesper. Miss Barfoot had an
engagement to dine out that evening, and Rhoda ended by inviting Milly
to come home with her to Chelsea. To Milly this was a great honour; she
hesitated because of her very plain dress, but easily allowed herself
to be persuaded when she saw that Miss Nunn really desired her company.

Before dinner they had a walk in Battersea Park. Rhoda had never been
so frank and friendly; she induced the quiet, unpretending girl to talk
of her early days, her schools, her family. Remarkable was Milly's
quiet contentedness; not long ago she had received an increase of
payment from Miss Barfoot, and one would have judged that scarcely a
wish now troubled her, unless it were that she might see her scattered
brothers and sisters, all of whom, happily, were doing pretty well in
the struggle for existence.

'You must feel rather lonely in your lodgings sometimes?' said Rhoda.

'Very rarely. In future I shall have music in the evening. Our best
room has been let to a young man who has a violin, and he plays "The
Blue Bells of Scotland"--not badly.'

Rhoda did not miss the humorous intention, veiled, as usual, under a
manner of extreme sedateness.

'Does Mrs. Widdowson come to see you?'

'Not often. She came a few days ago.'

'You go to her house sometimes?'

'I haven't been there for several months. At first I used to go rather
frequently, but--it's a long way.'

To this subject Rhoda returned after dinner, when they were cosily
settled in the drawing-room.

'Mrs. Widdowson comes here now and then, and we are always very glad to
see her. But I can't help thinking she looks rather unhappy.'
