
'I'm afraid she does,' assented the other gravely.

'You and I were both at her wedding. It wasn't very cheerful, was it? I
had a disagreeable sense of bad omens all the time. Do you think she is
sorry?'

'I'm really afraid she is.'

Rhoda observed the look that accompanied this admission.

'Foolish girl! Why couldn't she stay with us, and keep her liberty? She
doesn't seem to have made any new friends. Has she spoken to you of
any?'

'Only of people she has met here.'

Rhoda yielded--or seemed to yield--to an impulse of frankness. Bending
slightly forward, with an anxious expression, she said in confidential
tones--

'Can you help to put my mind at rest about Monica? You saw her a week
ago. Did she say anything, or give any sign, that might make one really
uneasy on her account?'

There was a struggle in Milly before she answered. Rhoda added--

'Perhaps you had rather not--'

'Yes, I had rather tell you. She said a good many strange things, and I
_have_ been uneasy about her. I wished I could speak to some one--'

'How strange that I should feel urged to ask you about this,' said
Rhoda, her eyes, peculiarly bright and keen, fixed on the girl's face.
'The poor thing is very miserable, I am sure. Her husband seems to
leave her entirely to herself.'

Milly looked surprised.

'Monica made quite the opposite complaint to me. She said that was a
prisoner.'

'That's very odd. She certainly goes about a good deal and alone.'

'I didn't know that,' said Milly. 'She has very often talked to me
about a woman's right to the same freedom as a man, and I always
understood that Mr. Widdowson objected to her going anywhere without
him, except just to call here, or at my lodgings.'

'Do you think she has any acquaintance that he dislikes?'

The direct answer was delayed, but it came at length.

'There is some one. She hasn't told me who it is.'

'In plain words, Mr. Widdowson thinks he has cause for jealousy?'

'Yes, I understand Monica to mean that.'

Rhoda's face had grown very dark. She moved her hands nervously.

'But--you don't think she could deceive him?'

'Oh, I can't think that!' replied Miss Vesper, with much earnestness.
'But what I couldn't help fearing, after I saw her last, was that she
might almost be tempted to leave her husband. She spoke so much of
freedom--and of a woman's right to release herself if she found her
marriage was a mistake.'

'I am so grateful to you for telling me all this. We must try to help
her. Of course I will make no mention of you, Miss Vesper. Then you are
really under the impression that there's some one she--prefers to her
husband?'

'I can't help thinking there is,' admitted the other very solemnly. 'I
was so sorry for her, and felt so powerless. She cried a little. All I
could do was to entreat her not to behave rashly. I thought her sister
ought to know--'

'Oh, Miss Madden is useless. Monica cannot look to her for advice or
support.'

After this conversation Rhoda passed a very unquiet night, and gloom
appeared in her countenance for the next few days.

She wished to have a private interview with Monica, but doubted whether
it would in any degree serve her purpose--that of discovering whether
certain suspicions she entertained had actual ground. Confidence
between her and Mrs. Widdowson had never existed, and in the present
state of things she could not hope to probe Monica's secret feelings.
Whilst she still brooded over the difficulty there came a letter for
her from Everard Barfoot. He wrote formally; it had occurred to him
that he might be of some slight service, in view of her approaching
holiday, if he looked through the guide-books, and jotted down the
outline of such a walking-tour as she had in mind. This he had done,
and the results were written out on an enclosed sheet of paper. Rhoda
allowed a day to intervene, then sent a reply. She thanked Mr. Barfoot
sincerely for the trouble he had so kindly taken. 'I see you limit me
to ten miles a day. In such scenery of course one doesn't hurry on, but
I can't help informing you that twenty miles wouldn't alarm me. I think
it very likely that I shall follow your itinerary, after my week of
bathing and idling. I leave on Monday week.'

Barfoot did not call again. Every evening she sat in expectation of his
coming. Twice Miss Barfoot was away until a late hour, and on those
occasions, after dinner, Rhoda sat in complete idleness, her face
declaring the troubled nature of 'her thoughts. On the Sunday before
her departure she took a sudden resolve and went to call upon Monica at
Herne Hill.

Mrs. Widdowson, she learnt from the servant, had left home about an
hour since.

'Is Mr. Widdowson at home?'

Yes, he was. And Rhoda waited for some time in the drawing-room until
he made his appearance. Of late Widdowson had grown so careless in the
matter of toilet, that an unexpected visit obliged him to hurry through
a change of apparel before he could present himself. Looking upon him
for the first time for several months, Rhoda saw that misery was
undermining the man's health. Words could not have declared his trouble
more plainly than the haggard features and stiff, depressed,
self-conscious manner. He fixed his sunken eyes upon the visitor, and
smiled, as was plain, only for civility's sake. Rhoda did her best to
seem at ease; she explained (standing, for he forgot to ask her to be
seated) that she was going away on the morrow, and had hoped to see
Mrs. Widdowson, who, she was told, had not been very well of late.

'No, she is not in very good health,' said Widdowson vaguely. 'She has
gone this afternoon to Mrs. Cosgrove's--I think you know her.'

Less encouragement to remain could not have been offered, but Rhoda
conceived a hope of hearing something significant if she persevered in
conversation. The awkwardness of doing so was indifferent to her.

'Shall you be leaving town shortly, Mr. Widdowson?'

'We are not quite sure--But pray sit down, Miss Nunn. You haven't seen
my wife lately?'

He took a chair, and rested his hands upon his knees, gazing at the
visitor's skirt.

'Mrs. Widdowson hasn't been to see us for more than a month--if I
remember rightly.'

His look expressed both surprise and doubt.

'A month? But I thought--I had an idea--that she went only a few days
ago.'

'In the day time?'

'To Great Portland Street, I mean--to hear a lecture, or something of
that kind, by Miss Barfoot.'

Rhoda kept silence for a moment. Then she replied hastily--

'Oh yes--very likely--I wasn't there that afternoon.'

'I see. That would explain--'

He seemed relieved, but only for the instant; then his eyes glanced
hither and thither, with painful restlessness. Rhoda observed him
closely. After fidgeting with his feet, he suddenly took a stiff
position, and said in a louder voice--

'We are going to leave London altogether. I have decided to take a
house at my wife's native place, Clevedon. Her sisters will come and
live with us.'

'That is a recent decision, Mr. Widdowson?'

'I have thought about it for some time. London doesn't suit Monica's
health; I'm sure it doesn't. She will be much better in the country.'

'Yes, I think that very likely.'

'As you say that you have noticed her changed looks, I shall lose no
time in getting away.' He made a great show of determined energy. 'A
few weeks--. We will go down to Clevedon at once and find a house. Yes,
we will go to-morrow, or the day after. Miss Madden, also, is very far
from well. I wish I hadn't delayed so long.'

'You are doing very wisely, I think. I had meant to suggest something
of this kind to Mrs. Widdowson. Perhaps, if I went at once to Mrs.
Cosgrove's, I might be fortunate enough to find her still there?'

'You might. Did I understand you to say that you go away tomorrow? For
three weeks. Ah, then we may be getting ready to remove when you come
back.'

The change that had come over him was remarkable. He could not keep his
seat, and began to pace the end of the room. Seeing no possibility of
prolonging the talk for her own purposes, Rhoda accepted this
dismissal, and with the briefest leave-taking went her way to Mrs.
Cosgrove's.

She was deeply agitated. Monica had not attended that lecture of Miss
Barfoot's, and so, it was evident, had purposely deceived her husband.
To what end? Where were those hours spent? Mildred Vesper's report
supplied grounds for sombre conjecture, and the incident at Sloane
Square Station, the recollection of Monica and Barfoot absorbed in
talk, seemed to have a possible significance which fired Rhoda with
resentment.

Her arrival at Mrs. Cosgrove's was too late. Monica had been there said
the hostess, but had left nearly half an hour ago.

Rhoda's instant desire was to go on to Bayswater, and somehow keep
watch near the flats where Barfoot lived. Monica might be there. Her
coming forth from the building might be detected.

But the difficulty of the understanding, and, still more, a dread of
being seen hovering about that quarter, checked her purpose as soon as
it was formed. She returned home, and for an hour or two kept in
solitude.

'What has happened?' asked Miss Barfoot, when they at length met.

'Happened? Nothing that I know of.'

'You look very strange.'

'Your imagination. I have been packing; perhaps it's from stooping over
the trunk.'

This by no means satisfied Mary, who felt that things mysterious were
going on about her. But she could only wait, repeating to herself that
the grand _denouement_ decidedly was not far off.

At nine o'clock sounded the visitor's bell. If, as she thought likely,
the caller was Everard, Miss Barfoot decided that she would disregard
everything but the dramatic pressure of the moment, and leave those two
alone together for half an hour. Everard it was; he entered the
drawing-room with an unusual air of gaiety.

'I have been in the country all day,' were his first words; and he went
on to talk of trivial things--the doings of a Cockney excursion party
that had come under his notice.

In a few minutes Mary made an excuse for absenting herself. When she
was gone, Rhoda looked steadily at Barfoot, and asked--

'Have you really been out of town?'

'Why should you doubt it?'

'As I told you.

She averted her look. After examining her curiously, Everard came and
stood before her.

'I want to ask your leave to meet you somewhere during these next three
weeks. At any point on your route. We could have a day's ramble
together, and then--say good-bye.'

'The lake country is free to you, Mr. Barfoot.'

'But I mustn't miss you. You will leave Seascale to-morrow week?'

'At present I think so. But I can't restrict myself by any agreement.
Holiday must be a time of liberty.'

They looked at each other--she with a carelessness which was all but
defiance, he with a significant smile.

'To-morrow week, then, perhaps we may meet again.'

Rhoda made no reply, beyond a movement of her eyebrows, as if to
express indifference.

'I won't stay longer this evening. A pleasant journey to you!'

He shook hands, and left the room. In the hall Miss Barfoot came to
meet him; they exchanged a few words, unimportant and without reference
to what had passed between him and Rhoda. Nor did Rhoda speak of the
matter when joined by her friend. She retired early, having settled all
the arrangements for her departure by the ten o'clock express from
Euston next morning.

Her luggage was to consist of one trunk and a wallet with a strap,
which would serve the purposes of a man's knapsack. Save the
indispensable umbrella, she carried no impeding trifles. A new costume,
suitable for shore and mountain, was packed away in the trunk; Miss
Barfoot had judged of its effect, and was of opinion that it became the
wearer admirably.

But Rhoda, having adjusted everything that she was going to take with
her, still had an occupation which kept her up for several hours. From
a locked drawer she brought forth packets of letters, the storage of
many years, and out of these selected carefully perhaps a tithe, which
she bound together and deposited in a box; the remainder she burnt in
the empty fireplace. Moreover, she collected from about the room a
number of little objects, ornaments and things of use, which also found
a place in the same big box. All her personal property which had any
value for her, except books, was finally under lock and key, and in
portable repositories. But still she kept moving, as if in search of
trifles that might have escaped her notice; silently, in her soft
slippers, she strayed hither and thither, till the short summer night
had all but given place to dawn; and when at length weariness compelled
her to go to bed, she was not able to sleep.

Nor did Mary Barfoot enjoy much sleep that night. She lay thinking, and
forecasting strange possibilities.

On Monday evening, returned from Great Portland Street, the first thing
she did was to visit Rhoda's chamber. The ashes of burnt paper had been
cleared away, but a glance informed her of the needless and
unprecedented care with which Miss Nunn had collected and packed most
of the things that belonged to her. Again Mary had a troubled night.




CHAPTER XXII

HONOUR IN DIFFICULTIES


At Mrs. Cosgrove's, this Sunday afternoon, Monica had eyes and thoughts
for one person only. Her coming at all was practically an appointment
to meet Bevis, whom she had seen twice since her visit to the flat. A
day or two after that occasion, she received a call from the Bevis
girls, who told her of their brother's approaching departure for
Bordeaux, and thereupon she invited the trio to dine with her. A
fortnight subsequently to the dinner she had a chance encounter with
Bevis in Oxford Street; constraint of business did not allow him to
walk beside her for more than a minute or two, but they spoke of Mrs.
Cosgrove's on the following Sunday, and there, accordingly, found each
other.

Tremor of self-consciousness kept Monica in dread of being watched and
suspected. Few people were present to-day, and after exchanging formal
words with Bevis, she moved away to talk with the hostess. Not till
half an hour had passed did she venture to obey the glances which her
all but avowed lover cast towards her in conversation. He was so much
at ease, so like what she had always known him, that Monica asked
herself whether she had not mistaken the meaning of his homage. One
moment she hoped it might be so; the next, she longed for some sign of
passionate devotion, and thought with anguish of the day, now so near,
when he would be gone for ever. This, she ardently believed, was the
man who should have been her husband. Him she could love with heart and
soul, could make his will her absolute law, could live on his smiles,
could devote herself to his interests. The independence she had been
struggling to assert ever since her marriage meant only freedom to
love. If she had understood herself as she now did, her life would
never have been thus cast into bondage.

'The girls,' Bevis was saying, 'leave on Thursday. The rest of the week
I shall be alone. On Monday the furniture will be stowed away at the
Pantechnicon, and on Tuesday--off I go.'

A casual listener could have supposed that the prospect pleased him.
Monica, with a fixed smile, looked at the other groups conversing in
the room; no one was paying any attention to her. In the same moment
she heard a murmur from her companion's lips; he was speaking still,
but in a voice only just audible.

'Come on Friday afternoon about four o'clock.'

Her heart began to throb painfully, and she knew that a treacherous
colour had risen to her checks.

'Do come--once more--for the last time. It shall be just as
before--just as before. An hour's talk, and we will say good-bye to
each other.'

She was powerless to breathe a word. Bevis, noticing that Mrs. Cosgrove
had thrown a look in their direction, suddenly laughed as if at some
jest between them, and resumed his lively strain of talk. Monica also
laughed. An interval of make-believe, and again the soft murmur fell
upon her ear.

'I shall expect you. I know you won't refuse me this one last kindness.
Some day,' his voice was all but extinguished, 'some day--who knows?'

Dreadful hope struck through her. A stranger's eyes turned their way,
and again she laughed.

'On Friday, at four. I shall expect you.'

She rose, looked for an instant about the room, then offered him her
hand, uttering some commonplace word of leave-taking. Their eyes did
not meet. She went up to Mrs. Cosgrove, and as soon as possible left
the house.

Widdowson met her as she crossed the threshold of home. His face told
her that something extraordinary had happened, and she trembled before
him.

'Back already?' he exclaimed, with a grim smile. 'Be quick, and take
your things off, and come to the library.'

If he had discovered anything (the lie, for instance, that she told him
a month ago, or that more recent falsehood when she pretended, without
serious reason, to have been at Miss Barfoot's lecture), he would not
look and speak thus. Hurrying, panting, she made a change of dress, and
obeyed his summons.

'Miss Nunn has been here,' were his first words.

She turned pale as death. Of course he observed it; she was now
preparing for anything.

'She wanted to see you because she is going away on Monday. What's the
matter?'

'Nothing. You spoke so strangely--'

'Did I? And you _look_ very strangely. I don't understand you. Miss
Nunn says that everybody has noticed how ill you seem. It's time we did
something. To-morrow morning we are going down into Somerset, to
Clevedon, to find a house.'

'I thought you had given up that idea.'

'Whether I had or not doesn't matter.'

In the determination to appear, and be, energetic, he spoke with a
rough obstinacy, a doggedness that now and then became violence. 'I am
decided on it now. There's a train to Bristol at ten-twenty. You will
pack just a few things; we shan't be away for more than a day or two.'

Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday--By Friday they might be back. Till now,
in an anguish of uncertainty, Monica had made up her mind. She would
keep the appointment on Friday, come of it what might. If she could not
be back in time, she would write a letter.

'Why are you talking in this tone?' she said coldly.

'What tone? I am telling you what I have decided to do, that's all. I
shall easily find a house down there, no doubt. Knowing the place, you
will be able to suggest the likely localities.'

She sat down, for strength was failing her.

'It's quite true,' Widdowson went on, staring at her with inflamed
eyes. 'You are beginning to look like a ghost. Oh, we'll have an end of
this!' He cackled in angry laughter. 'Not a day's unnecessary delay!
Write to both your sisters this evening and tell them. I wish them both
to come and live with us.'

'Very well.'

'Now, won't you be glad? Won't it be better in every way?'

He came so near that she felt his feverish breath.

'I told you before,' she answered, 'to do just as you liked.'

'And you won't talk about being kept a prisoner?'

Monica laughed.

'Oh no, I won't say anything at all.'

She scarcely knew what words fell from her lips. Let him propose, let
him do what he liked; to her it was indifferent. She saw something
before her--something she durst not, even an hour ago, have steadily
contemplated; it drew her with the force of fate.

'You know we couldn't go on living like this--don't you, Monica?'

'No, we couldn't.'

'You see!' He almost shouted in triumph, misled by the smile on her
face. 'All that was needed was resolution on my part. I have been
absurdly weak, and weakness in the husband means unhappiness in the
wife. From today you look to me for guidance. I am no tyrant, but I
shall rule you for your own good.'

Still she smiled.

'So there's an end of our misery--isn't it, darling? What misery! Good
God, how I have suffered! Haven't you known it?'

'I have known it too well.'

'And now you will make up to me for it, Monica?'

Again prompted by the irresistible force, she answered mechanically,--

'I will do the best for both.'

He threw himself on the ground beside her and clasped her in his arms.

'No, that is my own dear wife once more! Your face has altogether
changed. See how right it is that a husband should take the law into
his own hands! Our second year of marriage shall be very different from
the first. And yet we _were_ happy, weren't we, my beautiful? It's only
this cursed London that has come between us. At Clevedon we shall begin
our life over again--like we did at Guernsey. All our trouble, I am
convinced, has come of your ill-health. This air has never suited you;
you have felt miserable, and couldn't be at peace in your home. Poor
little girl! My poor darling!'

Through the evening he was in a state of transport, due partly to the
belief that Monica really welcomed his decision, partly to the sense of
having behaved at length like a resolute man. His eyes were severely
bloodshot, and before bedtime headache racked him intolerably.

Everything was carried out as he had planned it. They journeyed down
into Somerset, put up at a Clevedon hotel, and began house-hunting. On
Wednesday the suitable abode was discovered--a house of modest
pretensions, but roomy and well situated. It could be made ready for
occupation in a fortnight. Bent on continuing his exhibition of
vigorous promptitude, Widdowson signed a lease that same evening.

'To-morrow we will go straight home and make our preparations for
removal. When all is ready, you shall come down here and live at the
hotel until the house is furnished. Go to your sister Virginia and
simply bid her do as you wish. Imitate me!' He laughed fatuously.
'Don't listen to any objection. When you have once got her away she
will thank you.'

By Thursday afternoon they were back at Herne Hill. Widdowson still
kept up the show of extravagant spirits, but he was worn out. He spoke
so hoarsely that one would have thought he had contracted a severe sore
throat; it resulted merely from nervous strain. After a pretence of
dinner, he seated himself as if to read; glancing at him a few minutes
later, Monica found that he was fast asleep.

She could not bear to gaze at him, yet her eyes turned thither again
and again. His face was repulsive to her; the deep furrows, the red
eyelids, the mottled skin moved her to loathing. And yet she pitied
him. His frantic exultation was the cruelest irony. What would he do?
What would become of him? She turned away, and presently left the room,
for the sound of his uneasy breathing made her suffer too much.

When he woke up, he came in search of her, and laughed over his
involuntary nap.

'Well, now, you will go and see your sister to-morrow morning.'

'In the afternoon, I think.'

'Why? Don't let us have any procrastination. The morning, the morning!'

'Please do let me have my way in such a trifle as that,' Monica
exclaimed nervously. 'I have all sorts of things to see to here before
I can go out.'

He caressed her.

'You shan't say that I am unreasonable. In the afternoon, then. And
don't listen to any objections.'

'No, no.'

* * * * * * * * * *

It was Friday. All the morning Widdowson had business with house agents
and furniture removers, for he would not let a day go by without some
practical step towards release from the life he detested. Monica seemed
to be equally active in her own department; she was turning out drawers
and wardrobes, and making selection of things--on some principle
understood by herself. A flush remained upon her cheeks, in marked
contrast to the pallor which for a long time had given her an
appearance of wasting away. That and her singularly bright eyes endowed
her with beauty suggestive of what she might have gained in happy
marriage.

They had luncheon at one o'clock, and at a quarter to two Monica started
by train for Clapham Junction. It was her purpose to have a short
conversation with Virginia, who knew of the trip to Clevedon, and to
speak as though she were quite reconciled to the thought of removal;
after that, she would pursue her journey so as to reach Bayswater by
four o'clock. But Virginia was not at home. Mrs. Conisbee said she had
gone out at eleven in the morning, and with the intention of returning
by teatime. After a brief hesitation Monica requested the landlady to
deliver a message.

'Please ask her not to come to Herne Hill until she hears from me, as I
am not likely to be at home for a day or two.'

This left more time at her disposal than she knew how to employ. She
returned to the railway station, and travelled on to Victoria; there,
in the corner of a waiting-room, she sat, feverishly impatient, until
her watch told her that she might take the next train westward.

A possible danger was before her--though perhaps she need not trouble
herself with the thought of such dangers. What if Mr. Barfoot happened
to encounter her as she ascended the stairs? But most likely he had no
idea that her female friends, who dwelt on the floor above him, were
gone away. Did it matter what he might think? In a day or two--

She came to the street, approached the block of flats, involuntarily
casting anxious glances about her. And when she was within twenty yards
of the door, it opened, and forth came Barfoot. Her first sensation was
unreasoning terror; her next, thankfulness that she had not been a few
minutes sooner, when the very meeting she had feared, within the
building itself, would have come to pass. He walked this way; he saw
her; and the pleasantest smile of recognition lit up his face.

'Mrs. Widdowson! Not a minute ago you were in my thoughts. I wished I
could see you.'

'I am going--to make a call in this neighbourhood--'

She could not command herself. The shock had left her trembling, and
the necessity of feigning calmness was a new trial of her nerves.
Barfoot, she felt certain, was reading her face like a printed page; he
saw guilt there; his quickly-averted eyes, his peculiar smile, seemed
to express the facile tolerance of a man of the world.

'Allow me to accompany you to the end of the street.'

His words buzzed in her ears. She walked on without conscious effort,
like an automaton obedient to a touch.

'You know that Miss Nunn has gone down into Cumberland?' Barfoot was
saying, his look bent upon her.

'Yes. I know.'

She tried to glance at him with a smile.

'To-morrow,' he pursued, 'I am going there myself.'

'To Cumberland?'

'I shall see her, I hope. Perhaps she will only be angry with me.'

'Perhaps. But perhaps not.'

Her confusion would not be overcome. She felt a burning in her ears, on
her neck. It was an agony of shame. The words she spoke sounded
imbecile mutterings, which must confirm Barfoot in his worst opinion of
her.

'If it is all in vain,' he continued, 'then I shall say good-bye, and
there's an end.'

'I hope not--I should think--'

Useless. She set her lips and became mute. If only he would leave her!
And almost immediately he did so, with a few words of kind tone. She
felt the pressure of his hand, and saw him walk rapidly away; doubtless
he knew this was what she desired.

Until he had passed out of sight, Monica kept the same direction. Then
she turned round and hurried back, fearful lest the detention might
make her late, and Bevis might lose hope of her coming. There could be
no one in the building now whom she need fear to meet. She opened the
big entrance door and went up.

Bevis must have been waiting for the sound of her light footstep; his
door flew open before she could knock. Without speaking, a silent laugh
of joy upon his lips, he drew back to make room for her entrance, and
then pressed both her hands.

In the sitting-room were beginnings of disorder. Pictures had been
taken down from the walls and light ornaments removed.

'I shan't sleep here after to-night,' Bevis began, his agitation
scarcely less obvious than Monica's. 'To-morrow I shall be packing what
is to go with me. How I hate it all!'

Monica dropped into a chair near the door.

'Oh, not there!' he exclaimed. 'Here, where you sat before. We are
going to have tea together again.'

His utterances were forced, and the laugh that came between them
betrayed the quivering of his nerves.

'Tell me what you have been doing. I have thought of you day and night.'

He brought a chair close to her, and when he had seated himself he took
one of her hands. Monica, scarcely repressing a sob, the result of
reaction from her fears and miseries, drew the hand away. But again he
took it.

'There's the glove on it,' he said in a shaking voice. 'What harm in my
holding your glove? Don't think of it, and talk to me. I love music,
but no music is like your voice.'

'You go on Monday?'

It was her lips spoke the sentence, not she.

'No, on Tuesday--I think.'

'My--Mr. Widdowson is going to take me away from London.'

'Away?'

She told him the circumstances. Bevis kept his eyes upon her face, with
a look of rapt adoration which turned at length to pain and woeful
perplexity.

'You have been married a year,' he murmured. 'Oh, if I had met you
before that! What a cruel fate that we should know each other only when
there was no hope!'

The man revealed himself in this dolorous sentimentality. His wonted
blitheness and facetiousness, his healthy features, his supple,
well-built frame, suggested that when love awoke within him he would
express it with virile force. But he trembled and blushed like a young
girl, and his accents fell at last into a melodious whining.

He raised the gloved fingers to his lips. Monica bent her face away,
deadly pale, with closed eyes.

'Are we to part to-day, and never again see each other?' he went on.
'Say that you love me! Only say that you love me!'

'You despise me for coming to you like this.'

'Despise you?'

In a sudden rapture he folded his arms about her.

'Say that you love me!'

He kissed away the last syllable of her whispered reply.

'Monica!--what is there before us? How can I leave you?'

Yielding herself for the moment in a faintness that threatened to
subdue her, she was yet able, when his caresses grew wild with passion,
to put back his arms and move suddenly away. He sprang up, and they
stood speechless. Again he drew near.

'Take me away with you!' Monica then cried, clasping her hands
together. 'I can't live with _him_. Let me go with you to France.'

Bevis's blue eyes widened with consternation.

'Dare you--dare you do that?' he stammered.

'Dare I? What courage is needed? How _dare_ I remain with a man I hate?'

'You must leave him. Of course you must leave him.'

'Oh, before another day has passed!' sobbed Monica. 'It is wrong even
to go back to-day. I love you, and in that there is nothing to be
ashamed of; but what bitter shame to be living with _him_, practising
hypocrisy. He makes me hate myself as much as I hate _him_.'

'Has he behaved brutally to you, dearest?'

'I have nothing to accuse him of, except that he persuaded me to marry
him--made me think that I could love him when I didn't know what love
meant. And now he wishes to get me away from all the people I know
because he is jealous of every one. And how can I blame him? Hasn't he
cause for jealousy? I am deceiving him--I have deceived him for a long
time, pretending to be a faithful wife when I have often wished that he
might die and release me. It is I who am to blame. I ought to have left
him. Every woman who thinks of her husband as I do ought to go away
from him. It is base and wicked to stay there--pretending--deceiving--'

Bevis came towards her and took her in his arms.

'You love me?' she panted under his hot kisses. 'You will take me away
with you?'

'Yes, you shall come. We mustn't travel together, but you shall
come--when I am settled there--'

'Why can't I go with you?'

'My own darling, think what it would mean if our secret were
discovered--'

'Discovered? But how can we think of that? How can I go back there,
with your kisses on my lips? Oh, I must live somewhere in secret until
you go, and then--I have put aside the few things that I want to take.
I could never have continued to live with him even if you hadn't said
you love me. I was obliged to pretend that I agreed to everything, but
I will beg and starve rather than bear that misery any longer. Don't
you love me enough to face whatever may happen?'

'I love you with all my soul, Monica! Sit down again, dearest; let us
talk about it, and see what we can do.'

He half led, half carried, her to a couch, and there, holding her
embraced, gave way to such amorous frenzy that again Monica broke from
him.

'If you love me,' she said in tones of bitter distress, 'you will
respect me as much as before I came to you. Help me--I am suffering so
dreadfully. Say at once that I shall go away with you, even if we
travel as strangers. If you are afraid of it becoming known I will do
everything to prevent it. I will go back and live there until Tuesday,
and come away only at the last hour, so that no one will ever suspect
where--I don't care how humbly I live when we are abroad. I can have
lodgings somewhere in the same town, or near, and you will come--'

His hair disordered, his eyes wild, quivering throughout with
excitement, he stood as if pondering possibilities.

'Shall I be a burden to you?' she asked in a faint voice. 'Is the
expense more than you--'

'No, no, no! How can you think of such a thing? But it would be so much
better if you could wait here until I--Oh, what a wretched thing to
have to seem so cowardly to you! But the difficulties are so great,
darling. I shall be a perfect stranger in Bordeaux. I don't even speak
the language at all well. When I reach there I shall be met at the
station by one of our people, and--just think, how could we manage? You
know, if it were discovered that I had run away with you, it would
damage my position terribly. I can't say what might happen. My darling,
we shall have to be very careful. In a few weeks it might all be
managed very easily. I would write to you to some address, and as soon
as ever I had made arrangements--'

Monica broke down. The unmanliness of his tone was so dreadful a
disillusion. She had expected something so entirely different--swift,
virile passion, eagerness even to anticipate her desire of flight, a
strength, a courage to which she could abandon herself, body and soul.
She broke down utterly, and wept with her hands upon her face.

Bevis, in sympathetic distraction, threw himself on his knees before,
clutching at her waist.

'Don't, don't!' he wailed. 'I can't bear that! I will do as you wish,
Monica. Tell me some place where I can write to you. Don't cry,
darling--don't--'

She went to the couch again, and rested her face against the back,
sobbing. For a time they exchanged mere incoherences. Then passion
seized upon both, and they clung together, mute, motionless.

'To-morrow I shall leave him,' whispered Monica, when at length their
eyes met. 'He will be away in the morning, and I can take what I need.
Tell me where I shall go to, dear--to wait until you are ready. No one
will ever suspect that we have gone together. He knows I am miserable
with him; he will believe that I have found some way of supporting
myself in London. Where shall I live till Tuesday?'

Bevis scarcely listened to her words. The temptation of the natural
man, basely selfish, was strengthening its hold upon him.

'Do you love me? Do you really love me?' he replied to her, with thick,
agitated utterance.

'Why should you ask that? How can you doubt it?'

'If you really love me---'

His face and tones frightened her.

'Don't make me doubt _your_ love! If I have not perfect trust in you
what will become of me?'

Yet once more she drew resolutely away from him. He pursued, and held
her arms with violence.

'Oh, I am mistaken in you!' Monica cried in fear and bitterness. 'You
don't know what love means, as _I_ feel it. You won't speak, you won't
think, of our future life together--'

'I have promised--'

'Leave loose of me! It's because I have come here. You think me a
worthless woman, without sense of honour, with no self-respect--'

He protested vehemently. The anguished look in her eyes had its effect
upon his senses; by degrees it subjugated him, and made him ashamed of
his ignoble impulse.

'Shall I find a lodging for you till Tuesday?' he asked, after moving
away arid returning.

'Will you?'

'You are sure you can leave home to-morrow--without being suspected?'

'Yes, I am sure I can. He is going to the City in the morning. Appoint
some place where I can meet you. I will come in a cab, and then you can
take me on to the--'

'But you are forgetting the risks. If you take a cab from Herne Hill,
with your luggage, he will be able to find out the driver afterwards,
and learn where you went.'

'Then I will drive only as far as the station, and come to Victoria,
and you shall meet me there.'

The necessity of these paltry arrangements filled her soul with shame.
On the details of her escape she had hardly reflected. All such
considerations were, she deemed, naturally the care of her lover, who
would act with promptitude, and so as to spare her a moment's
perplexity. She had imagined everything in readiness within a few
hours; on _her_ no responsibility save that of breaking the hated bond.
Inevitably she turned to the wretched thought that Bevis regarded her
as a burden. Yes, he had already his mother and his sisters to support;
she ought to have remembered that.

'What time would it be?' he was asking.

Unable to reply, she pursued her reflections. She had money, but how to
obtain possession of it? Afterwards, when her flight was accomplished,
secrecy, it appeared, would be no less needful than now. That necessity
had never occurred to her; declaration of the love that had freed her
seemed inevitable--nay, desirable. Her self-respect demanded it; only
thus could she justify herself before his sisters and other people who
knew her. _They_, perhaps, would not see it in the light of
justification, but that mattered little; her own conscience would
approve what she had done. But to steal away, and live henceforth in
hiding, like a woman dishonoured even in her own eyes--from that she
shrank with repugnance. Rather than that, would it not be preferable to
break with her husband, and openly live apart from him, alone?

'Be honest with me,' she suddenly exclaimed. 'Had you rather I didn't
come?'

'No, no! I can't live without you--'

'But, if that is true, why haven't you the courage to let every one
know it? In your heart you must think that we are acting wrongly.'

'I don't! I believe, as you do, that love is the only true marriage.
Very well!' He made a desperate gesture. 'Let us defy all consequences.
For your sake--'

His exaggerated vehemence could not deceive Monica.

'What is it,' she asked, 'that you most fear?'

He began to babble protestations, but she would not listen to them.

'Tell me--I have every right to ask--what you most fear?'

'I fear nothing if _you_ are with me. Let my relatives say and think
what they like. I have made great sacrifices for them; to give up _you_
would be too much.'

Yet his distress was evident. It strained the corners of his mouth,
wrinkled his forehead.

'The disgrace would be more than you could bear. You would never see
your mother and your sisters again.'

'If they are so prejudiced, so unreasonable, I can't help it. They
must--'

He was interrupted by a loud rat-tat at the outer door. Blanched
herself, Monica saw that her lover's face turned to ghastly pallor.

'Who can that be?' he whispered hoarsely. 'I expect no one.'

'Need you answer?'

'Can it be--? Have you been followed? Does any one suspect--?'

They stared at each other, still half-paralysed, and stood waiting thus
until the knock was repeated impatiently.

'I daren't open,' Bevis whispered, coming close to her, as if on the
impulse of seeking protection--for to offer it was assuredly not in his
mind. 'It might be--'

'No! That's impossible.'

'I daren't go to the door. The risk is too frightful. He will go away,
whoever it is, if no one answers.'

Both were shaking in the second stage of terror. Bevis put his arm
about Monica, and felt her heart give great throbs against his own.
Their passion for the moment was effectually quenched.

'Listen! That's the clink of the letter-box. A card or something has
been put in. Then it's all right. I'll wait a moment.'

He stepped to the door of the room, opened it without sound, and at
once heard footsteps descending the stairs. In the look which he cast
back at her, a grin rather than a smile, Monica saw something that gave
her a pang of shame on his behalf. On going to the letter-box he found
a card, with a few words scribbled upon it.

'Only one of our partners!' he exclaimed gleefully. 'Wants to see me
to-night. Of course he took it for granted I was out.'

Monica was looking at her watch. Past five o'clock.

'I think I must go,' she said timidly.

'But what are our arrangements? Do you still intend--'

'Intend? Isn't it for you to decide?'

There was a coldness in the words of both, partly the result of the
great shock they had undergone, in part due to their impatience with
each other.

'Darling--do what I proposed at first. Stay for a few days, until I am
settled at Bordeaux.'

'Stay with my--my husband?'

She used the word purposely, significantly, to see how it would affect
him. The bitterness of her growing disillusion allowed her to think and
speak as if no ardent feeling were concerned.

'For both our sakes, dearest, dearest love! A few days longer, until I
have written to you, and told you exactly what to do. The journey won't
be very difficult for you; and think how much better, dear Monica, if
