CHAPTER I


It was Mumford who saw the advertisement and made the suggestion.
His wife gave him a startled look.

'But--you don't mean that it's necessary? Have we been extrav--'

'No, no! Nothing of the kind. It just occurred to me that some such
arrangement might be pleasant for you. You must feel lonely, now and
then, during the day, and as we have plenty of room--'

Emmeline took the matter seriously, but, being a young woman of some
discretion, did not voice all her thoughts. The rent was heavy: so
was the cost of Clarence's season-ticket. Against this they had set
the advantage of the fine air of Sutton, so good for the child and
for the mother, both vastly better in health since they quitted
London. Moreover, the remoteness of their friends favoured economy;
they could easily decline invitations, and need not often issue
them. They had a valid excuse for avoiding public entertainments--an
expense so often imposed by mere fashion. The house was roomy, the
garden delightful. Clarence, good fellow, might be sincere in his
wish for her to have companionship; at the same time, this
advertisement had probably appealed to him in another way.

'A YOUNG LADY desires to find a home with respectable,
well-connected family, in a suburb of London, or not more than 15
miles from Charing Cross. Can give excellent references. Terms not
so much a consideration as comfort and pleasant society. No
boarding-house.--Address: Louise, Messrs. Higgins & Co., Fenchurch
St., E.C.'

She read it again and again.

'It wouldn't be nice if people said that we were taking lodgers.'

'No fear of that. This is evidently some well-to-do person. It's a
very common arrangement nowadays, you know; they are called "paying
guests." Of course I shouldn't dream of having anyone you didn't
thoroughly like the look of.'

'Do you think,' asked Emmeline doubtfully, 'that we should quite
_do_? "Well-connected family"--'

'My dear girl! Surely we have nothing to be ashamed of?'

'Of course not, Clarence. But--and "pleasant society." What about
that?'

'Your society is pleasant enough, I hope,' answered Mumford,
gracefully. 'And the Fentimans--'

This was the only family with whom they were intimate at Sutton.
Nice people; a trifle sober, perhaps, and not in conspicuously
flourishing circumstances; but perfectly presentable.

'I'm afraid--' murmured Emmeline, and stopped short. 'As you say,'
she added presently, 'this is someone very well off. "Terms not so
much a consideration"--'

'Well, I tell you what--there can be no harm in dropping a note. The
kind of note that commits one to nothing, you know. Shall I write
it, or will you?'

They concocted it together, and the rough draft was copied by
Emmeline. She wrote a very pretty hand, and had no difficulty
whatever about punctuation. A careful letter, calculated for the eye
of refinement; it supplied only the indispensable details of the
writer's position, and left terms for future adjustment.

'It's so easy to explain to people,' said Mumford, with an air of
satisfaction, when he came back from the post, 'that you wanted a
companion. As I'm quite sure you do. A friend coming to stay with
you for a time--that's how I should put it.'

A week passed, and there came no reply. Mumford pretended not to
care much, but Emmeline imagined a new anxiety in his look.

'Do be frank with me, dear,' she urged one evening. 'Are we living
too--'

He answered her with entire truthfulness. Ground for serious
uneasiness there was none whatever; he could more than make ends
meet, and had every reason to hope it would always be so; but it
would relieve his mind if the end of the year saw a rather larger
surplus. He was now five-and-thirty--getting on in life. A man ought
to make provision beyond the mere life-assurance--and so on.

'Shall I look out for other advertisements?' asked Emmeline.

'Oh, dear, no! It was just that particular one that caught my eye.'

Next morning arrived a letter, signed 'Louise E. Derrick.' The
writer said she had been waiting to compare and think over some two
hundred answers to her advertisement. 'It's really too absurd. How
can I remember them all? But I liked yours as soon as I read it, and
I am writing to you first of all. Will you let me come and see you?
I can tell you about myself much better than writing. Would tomorrow
do, in the afternoon? Please telegraph yes or no to Coburg Lodge,
Emilia Road, Tulse Hill.'

To think over this letter Mumford missed his ordinary train. It was
not exactly the kind of letter he had expected, and Emmeline shared
his doubts. The handwriting seemed just passable; there was no
orthographic error; but--refinement? This young person wrote, too,
with such singular nonchalance. And she said absolutely nothing
about her domestic circumstances. Coburg Lodge, Tulse Hill. A decent
enough locality, doubtless; but--

'There's no harm in seeing her,' said Emmeline at length. 'Send a
telegram, Clarence. Do you know, I think she _may_ be the right kind
of girl. I was thinking of someone awfully grand, and it's rather a
relief. After all, you see, you--you are in business--'

'To be sure. And this girl seems to belong to a business family. I
only wish she wrote in a more ladylike way.'

Emmeline set her house in order, filled the drawing-room with
flowers, made the spare bedroom as inviting as possible, and, after
luncheon, spent a good deal of time in adorning her person. She was
a slight, pretty woman of something less than thirty; with a good,
but pale, complexion, hair tending to auburn, sincere eyes. Her
little vanities had no roots of ill-nature; she could admire without
envy, and loved an orderly domestic life. Her husband's desire to
increase his income had rather unsettled her; she exaggerated the
importance of to-day's interview, and resolved with nervous energy
to bring it to a successful issue, if Miss Derrick should prove a
possible companion.

About four o'clock sounded the visitor's ring. From her bedroom
window Emmeline had seen Miss Derrick's approach. As the distance
from the station was only five minutes' walk, the stranger naturally
came on foot. A dark girl, and of tolerably good features; rather
dressy; with a carriage corresponding to the tone of her letter--an
easy swing; head well up and shoulders squared. 'Oh, how I _hope_
she isn't vulgar!' said Emmeline to herself. 'I don't like the
hat--I don't. And that sunshade with the immense handle.' From the
top of the stairs she heard a clear, unaffected voice: 'Mrs. Mumford
at home?' Yes, the aspirate _was_ sounded--thank goodness!

It surprised her, on entering the room, to find that Miss Derrick
looked no less nervous than she was herself. The girl's cheeks were
flushed, and she half choked over her 'How do you do?'

'I hope you had no difficulty in finding the house. I would have met
you at the station if you had mentioned the train. Oh, but--how
silly!--I shouldn't have known you.'

Miss Derrick laughed, and seemed of a sudden much more at ease.

'Oh, I like you for that!' she exclaimed mirthfully. 'It's just the
kind of thing I say myself sometimes. And I'm so glad to see that
you are--you mustn't be offended--I mean you're not the kind of
person to be afraid of.'

They laughed together. Emmeline could not subdue her delight when
she found that the girl really might be accepted as a lady. There
were faults of costume undeniably; money had been misspent in
several directions; but no glaring vulgarity hurt the eye. And her
speech, though not strictly speaking refined, was free from the
faults that betray low origin. Then, she seemed good-natured though
there was something about her mouth not altogether charming.

'Do you know Sutton at all?' Emmeline inquired.

'Never was here before. But I like the look of it. I like this
house, too. I suppose you know a lot of people here, Mrs. Mumford?'

'Well--no. There's only one family we know at all well. Our friends
live in London. Of course they often come out here. I don't know
whether you are acquainted with any of them. The Kirby Simpsons, of
West Kensington; and Mrs. Hollings, of Highgate--'

Miss Derrick cast down her eyes and seemed to reflect. Then she
spoke abruptly.

'I don't know any people to speak of. I ought to tell you that my
mother has come down with me. She's waiting at the station till I go
back; then she'll come and see you. You're surprised? Well, I had
better tell you that I'm leaving home because I can't get on with my
people. Mother and I have always quarrelled, but it has been worse
than ever lately. I must explain that she has married a second time,
and Mr. Higgins--I'm glad to say that isn't _my_ name--has a
daughter of his own by a first marriage; and we can't bear each
other--Miss Higgins, I mean. Some day, if I come to live here, I
daresay I shall tell you more. Mr. Higgins is rich, and I can't say
he's unkind to me; he'll give me as much as I want; but I'm sure
he'll be very glad to get me out of the house. I have no money of my
own--worse luck! Well, we thought it best for me to come alone,
first, and see--just to see, you know--whether we were likely to
suit each other. Then mother will come and tell you all she has to
say about me. Of course I know what it'll be. They all say I've a
horrible temper. I don't think so myself; and I'm sure I don't think
I should quarrel with _you_, you look so nice. But I can't get on at
home, and it's better for all that we should part. I'm just
two-and-twenty--do I look older? I haven't learnt to do anything,
and I suppose I shall never need to.'

'Do you wish to see _much_ society?' inquired Mrs. Mumford, who was
thinking rapidly, 'or should you prefer a few really nice people?
I'm afraid I don't quite understand yet whether you want society of
the pleasure-seeking kind, or--'

She left the alternative vague. Miss Derrick again reflected for a
moment before abruptly declaring herself.

'I feel sure that your friends are the kind I want to know. At all
events, I should like to try. The great thing is to get away from
home and see how things look.'

They laughed together. Emmeline, after a little more talk, offered
to take her visitor over the house, and Miss Derrick had loud praise
for everything she saw.

'What I like about you,' she exclaimed of a sudden, as they stood
looking from a bedroom window on to the garden, 'is that you don't
put on any--you know what I mean. People seem to me to be generally
either low and ignorant, or so high and mighty there's no getting on
with them at all. You're just what I wanted to find. Now I must go
and send mother to see you.'

Emmeline protested against this awkward proceeding. Why should not
both come together and have a cup of tea? If it were desired, Miss
Derrick could step into the garden whilst her mother said whatever
she wished to say. The girl assented, and in excellent spirits
betook herself to the railway station. Emmeline waited something
less than a quarter of an hour; then a hansom drove up, and Mrs.
Higgins, after a deliberate surveyal of the house front, followed
her daughter up the pathway.

The first sight of the portly lady made the situation clearer to
Mrs. Mumford. Louise Derrick represented a certain stage of
civilisation, a degree of conscious striving for better things; Mrs.
Higgins was prosperous and self-satisfied vulgarity. Of a complexion
much lighter than the girl's, she still possessed a coarse
comeliness, which pointed back to the dairymaid type of damsel. Her
features revealed at the same time a kindly nature and an irascible
tendency. Monstrously overdressed, and weighted with costly gewgaws,
she came forward panting and perspiring, and, before paying any heed
to her hostess, closely surveyed the room.

'Mrs. Mumford,' said the girl, 'this is my mother. Mother, this is
Mrs. Mumford. And now, please, let me go somewhere while you have
your talk.'

'Yes, that'll be best, that'll be best,' exclaimed Mrs. Higgins.
'Dear, 'ow 'ot it is! Run out into the garden, Louise. Nice little
'ouse, Mrs. Mumford. And Louise seems quite taken with you. She
doesn't take to people very easy, either. Of course, you can give
satisfactory references? I like to do things in a business-like way.
I understand your 'usband is in the City; shouldn't wonder if he
knows some of Mr. 'Iggins's friends. Yes, I will take a cup, if you
please. I've just had one at the station, but it's such thirsty
weather. And what do you think of Louise? Because I'd very much
rather you said plainly if you don't think you could get on.'

'But, indeed, I fancy we could, Mrs. Higgins.'

'Well, I'm sure I'm very glad _of_ it. It isn't everybody can get on
with Louise. I dessay she's told you a good deal about me and her
stepfather. I don't think she's any reason to complain of the
treatment--'

'She said you were both very kind to her,' interposed the hostess.

'I'm sure we _try_ to be, and Mr. 'Iggins, he doesn't mind what he
gives her. A five-pound note, if you'll believe me, is no more than
a sixpence to him when he gives her presents. You see, Mrs.
Rumford--no, Mumford, isn't it?--I was first married very
young--scarcely eighteen, I was; and Mr. Derrick died on our
wedding-day, two years after. Then came Mr. 'Iggins. Of course I
waited a proper time. And one thing I can say, that no woman was
ever 'appier with two 'usbands than I've been. I've two sons growing
up, hearty boys as ever you saw. If it wasn't for this trouble with
Louise--' She stopped to wipe her face. 'I dessay she's told you
that Mr. 'Iggins, who was a widower when I met him, has a daughter
of his first marriage--her poor mother died at the birth, and she's
older than Louise. I don't mind telling _you_, Mrs. Mumford, she's
close upon six-and-twenty, and nothing like so good-looking as
Louise, neither. Mr. 'Iggins, he's kindness itself; but when it
comes to differences between his daughter and _my_ daughter, well,
it isn't in nature he shouldn't favour his own. There's more be'ind,
but I dessay you can guess, and I won't trouble you with things that
don't concern you. And that's how it stands, you see.'

By a rapid calculation Emmeline discovered; with surprise, that Mrs.
Higgins could not be much more than forty years of age. It must have
been a life of gross self-indulgence that had made the woman look at
least ten years older. This very undesirable parentage naturally
affected Emmeline's opinion of Louise, whose faults began to show in
a more pronounced light. One thing was clear: but for the fact that
Louise aimed at a separation from her relatives, it would be barely
possible to think of receiving her. If Mrs. Higgins thought of
coming down to Sutton at unexpected moments--no, that was too
dreadful.

'Should you wish, Mrs. Higgins, to entrust your daughter to me
entirely?'

'My dear Mrs. Rumford, it's very little that _my_ wishes has to do
with it! She's made up her mind to leave 'ome, and all I can do is
to see she gets with respectable people, which I feel sure you are;
and of course I shall have your references.'

Emmeline turned pale at the suggestion. She all but decided that the
matter must go no further.

'And what might your terms be--inclusive?' Mrs. Higgins proceeded to
inquire.

At this moment a servant entered with tea, and Emmeline, sorely
flurried, talked rapidly of the advantages of Sutton as a residence.
She did not allow her visitor to put in a word till the door closed
again. Then, with an air of decision, she announced her terms; they
would be three guineas a week. It was half a guinea more than she
and Clarence had decided to ask. She expected, she hoped, Mrs.
Higgins would look grave. But nothing of the kind; Louise's mother
seemed to think the suggestion very reasonable. Thereupon Emmeline
added that, of course, the young lady would discharge her own
laundress's bill. To this also Mrs. Higgins readily assented.

'A hundred and sixty pounds per annum!' Emmeline kept repeating to
herself. And, alas! it looked as if she might have asked much more.
The reference difficulty might be minimised by naming her own
married sister, who lived at Blackheath, and Clarence's most
intimate friend, Mr. Tarling, who held a good position in a City
house, and had a most respectable address at West Kensington. But
her heart misgave her. She dreaded her husband's return home.

The conversation was prolonged for half-an-hour. Emmeline gave her
references, and in return requested the like from Mrs. Higgins. This
astonished the good woman. Why, her husband was Messrs. 'Iggins of
Fenchurch Street! Oh, a mere formality, Emmeline hastened to
add--for Mr. Mumford's satisfaction. So Mrs. Higgins very pompously
named two City firms, and negotiations, for the present, were at an
end.

Louise, summoned to the drawing-room, looked rather tired of
waiting.

'When can you have me, Mrs. Mumford?' she asked. 'I've quite made up
my mind to come.'

'I'm afraid a day or two must pass, Miss Derrick--'

'The references, my dear,' began Mrs. Higgins.

'Oh, nonsense! It's all right; anyone can see.'

'There you go! Always cutting short the words in my mouth. I can't
endure such behaviour, and I wonder what Mrs. Rumford thinks of it.
I've given Mrs. Rumford fair warning--'

They wrangled for a few minutes, Emmeline feeling too depressed and
anxious to interpose with polite commonplaces. When at length they
took their leave, she saw the last of them with a sigh of
thanksgiving. It had happened most fortunately that no one called
this afternoon.

'Clarence, it's _quite_ out of the question.' Thus she greeted her
husband. 'The girl herself I could endure, but oh, her odious
mother!--Three guineas a week! I could cry over the thought.'

By the first post in the morning came a letter from Louise. She
wrote appealingly, touchingly. 'I know you couldn't stand my mother,
but do please have me. I like Sutton, and I like your house, and I
like you. I promise faithfully nobody from home shall ever come to
see me, so don't be afraid. Of course if you won't have me, somebody
else will; I've got two hundred to choose from, but I'd rather come
to you. Do write and say I may come. I'm so sorry I quarrelled with
mother before you. I promise never to quarrel with you. I'm very
good-tempered when I get what I want.' With much more to the same
effect.

'We _will_ have her,' declared Mumford. 'Why not, if the old people
keep away?--You are quite sure she sounds her _h's_?'

'Oh, quite. She has been to pretty good schools, I think. And I dare
say I could persuade her to get other dresses and hats.'

'Of course you could. Really, it seems almost a duty to take
her--doesn't it?'

So the matter was settled, and Mumford ran off gaily to catch his
train.

Three days later Miss Derrick arrived, bringing with her something
like half-a-ton of luggage. She bounded up the doorsteps, and,
meeting Mrs. Mumford in the hall, kissed her fervently.

'I've got such heaps to tell you Mr. Higgins has given me twenty
pounds to go on with--for myself; I mean; of course he'll pay
everything else. How delighted I am to be here! Please pay the
cabman I've got no change.'

A few hours before this there had come a letter from Mrs. Higgins;
better written and spelt than would have seemed likely.

'Dear Mrs. Mumford,' it ran, 'L. is coming to-morrow morning, and I
hope you won't repent. There's just one thing I meant to have said
to you but forgot, so I'll say it now. If it should happen that any
gentleman of your acquaintance takes a fancy to L., and if it should
come to anything, I'm sure both Mr. H. and me would be _most
thankful_, and Mr. H. would behave handsome to her. And what's more,
I'm sure he would be only too glad to show _in a handsome way_ the
thanks he would owe to you and Mr. M.--Very truly yours, Susan H.
Higgins.'




CHAPTER II


'Runnymede' (so the Mumfords' house was named) stood on its own
little plot of ground in one of the tree-shadowed roads which
persuade the inhabitants of Sutton that they live in the country. It
was of red brick, and double-fronted, with a porch of wood and
stucco; bay windows on one side of the entrance, and flat on the
other, made a contrast pleasing to the suburban eye. The little
front garden had a close fence of unpainted lath, a characteristic
of the neighbourhood. At the back of the house lay a long, narrow
lawn, bordered with flower-beds, and shaded at the far end by a fine
horse-chestnut.

Emmeline talked much of the delightful proximity of the Downs; one
would have imagined her taking long walks over the breezy uplands to
Banstead or Epsom, or yet further afield The fact was, she saw no
more of the country than if she had lived at Brixton. Her windows
looked only upon the surrounding houses and their garden foliage.
Occasionally she walked along the asphalte pavement of the Brighton
Road--a nursemaids' promenade--as far as the stone which marks
twelve miles from Westminster Bridge. Here, indeed, she breathed the
air of the hills, but villas on either hand obstructed the view, and
brought London much nearer than the measured distance. Like her
friends and neighbours, Emmeline enjoyed Sutton because it was a
most respectable little portion of the great town, set in a purer
atmosphere. The country would have depressed her.

In this respect Miss Derrick proved a congenial companion. Louise
made no pretence of rural inclinations, but had a great liking for
tree-shadowed asphalte, for the results of elaborate horticulture,
for the repose and the quiet of villadom.

'I should like to have a house just like this,' she declared, on her
first evening at "Runnymede," talking with her host and hostess out
in the garden. 'It's quite big enough, unless, of course, you have a
very large family, which must be rather a bore.' She laughed
ingenuously. 'And one gets to town so easily. What do you pay for
your season-ticket, Mr. Mumford? Oh, well! that isn't much. I almost
think I shall get one.'

'Do you wish to go up very often, then?' asked Emmeline, reflecting
on her new responsibilities.

'Oh! not every day, of course. But a season-ticket saves the bother
each time, and you have a sort of feeling, you know, that you can be
in town whenever you like.'

It had not hitherto been the Mumfords' wont to dress for dinner, but
this evening they did so, and obviously to Miss Derrick's
gratification. She herself appeared in a dress which altogether
outshone that of her hostess. Afterwards, in private, she drew
Emmeline's attention to this garb, and frankly asked her opinion of
it.

'Very nice indeed,' murmured the married lady, with a good-natured
smile. 'Perhaps a little--'

'There, I know what you're going to say. You think it's too showy.
Now I want you to tell me just what you think about
everything--everything. I shan't be offended. I'm not so silly. You
know I've come here to learn all sorts of things. To-morrow you
shall go over all my dresses with me, and those you don't like I'll
get rid of. I've never had anyone to tell me what's nice and what
isn't. I want to be--oh, well, you know what I mean.'

'But, my dear,' said Emmeline, 'there's something I don't quite
understand. You say I'm to speak plainly, and so I will. How is it
that you haven't made friends long ago with the sort of people you
wish to know? It isn't as if you were in poor circumstances.'

'How _could_ I make friends with nice people when I was ashamed to
have them at home? The best I know are quite poor--girls I went to
school with. They're much better educated than I am, but they make
their own living, and so I can't see very much of them, and I'm not
sure they want to see much of _me_. I wish I knew what people think
of me; they call me vulgar, I believe--the kind I'm speaking of.
Now, do tell me, Mrs. Mumford, _am_ I vulgar?'

'My dear Miss Derrick--' Emmeline began in protest, but was at once
interrupted.

'Oh! that isn't what I want. You must call me Louise, or Lou, if you
like, and just say what you really think. Yes, I see, I _am_ rather
vulgar, and what can you expect? Look at mother; and if you saw Mr.
Higgins, oh! The mistake I made was to leave school so soon. I got
sick of it, and left at sixteen, and of course the idiots at home--I
mean the foolish people--let me have my own way. I'm not clever, you
know, and I didn't get on well at school. They used to say I could
do much better if I liked, and perhaps it was more laziness than
stupidity, though I don't care for books--I wish I did. I've had
lots of friends, but I never keep them for very long. I don't know
whether it's their fault or mine. My oldest friends are Amy Barker
and Muriel Featherstone; they were both at the school at Clapham,
and now Amy does type-writing in the City, and Muriel is at a
photographer's. They're awfully nice girls, and I like them so much;
but then, you see, they haven't enough money to live in what _I_
call a nice way, and, you know, I should never think of asking them
to advise me about my dresses, or anything of that kind. A friend of
mine once began to say something and I didn't like it; after that we
had nothing to do with each other.'

Emmeline could not hide her amusement.

'Well, that's just it,' went on the other frankly. 'I _have_ rather
a sharp temper, and I suppose I don't get on well with most people.
I used to quarrel dreadfully with some of the girls at school--the
uppish sort. And yet all the time I wanted to be friends with them.
But, of course, I could never have taken them home.'

Mrs. Mumford began to read the girl's character, and to understand
how its complexity had shaped her life. She was still uneasy as to
the impression this guest would make upon their friends, but on the
whole it seemed probable that Louise would conscientiously submit
herself to instruction, and do her very best to be "nice."
Clarence's opinion was still favourable; he pronounced Miss Derrick
"very amusing," and less of a savage than his wife's description had
led him to expect.

Having the assistance of two servants and a nurse-girl, Emmeline was
not overburdened with domestic work. She soon found it fortunate
that her child, a girl of two years old, needed no great share of
her attention; for Miss Derrick, though at first she affected an
extravagant interest in the baby, very soon had enough of that
plaything, and showed a decided preference for Emmeline's society
out of sight and hearing of nursery affairs. On the afternoon of the
second day they went together to call upon Mrs. Fentiman, who lived
at a distance of a quarter of an hour's walk, in a house called
"Hazeldene"; a semi-detached house, considerably smaller than
"Runnymede," and neither without nor within so pleasant to look
upon. Mrs. Fentiman, a tall, hard-featured, but amiable lady, had
two young children who occupied most of her time; at present one of
them was ailing, and the mother could talk of nothing else but this
distressing circumstance. The call lasted only for ten minutes, and
Emmeline felt that her companion was disappointed.

'Children are a great trouble,' Louise remarked, when they had left
the house. 'People ought never to marry unless they can keep a lot
of servants. Not long ago I was rather fond of somebody, but I
wouldn't have him because he had no money. Don't you think I was
quite right?'

'I have no doubt you were.'

'And now,' pursued the girl, poking the ground with her sunshade as
she walked, 'there's somebody else. And that's one of the things I
want to tell you about. He has about three hundred a year. It isn't
much, of course; but I suppose Mr. Higgins would give me something.
And yet I'm sure it won't come to anything. Let's go home and have a
good talk, shall we?'

Mrs. Higgins's letter had caused Emmeline and her husband no little
amusement; but at the same time it led them to reflect. Certainly
they numbered among their acquaintances one or two marriageable
young men who might perchance be attracted by Miss Derrick,
especially if they learnt that Mr. Higgins was disposed to 'behave
handsomely' to his stepdaughter; but the Mumfords had no desire to
see Louise speedily married. To the bribe with which the letter
ended they could give no serious thought. Having secured their
"paying guest," they hoped she would remain with them for a year or
two at least. But already Louise had dropped hints such as Emmeline
could not fail to understand, and her avowal of serious interest in
a lover came rather as an annoyance than a surprise to Mrs. Mumford.

It was a hot afternoon, and they had tea brought out into the
garden, under the rustling leaves of the chestnut.

'You don't know anyone else at Sutton except Mrs. Fentiman?' said
Louise, as she leaned back in the wicker chair.

'Not intimately. But some of our friends from London will be coming
on Sunday. I've asked four people to lunch.'

'How jolly! Of course you'll tell me all about them before then. But
I want to talk about Mr. Cobb. Please, _two_ lumps of sugar. I've
known him for about a year and a half. We seem quite old friends,
and he writes to me; I don't answer the letters, unless there's
something to say. To tell the truth, I don't like him.'

'How can that be if you seem old friends?'

'Well, he likes _me_; and there's no harm in that, so long as he
understands. I'm sure _you_ wouldn't like him. He's a rough, coarse
sort of man, and has a dreadful temper.'

'Good gracious! What is his position?'

'Oh, he's connected with the what-d'ye-call-it Electric Lighting
Company. He travels about a good deal. I shouldn't mind that; it
must be rather nice not to have one's husband always at home. Just
now I believe he's in Ireland. I shall be having a letter from him
very soon, no doubt. He doesn't know I've left home, and it'll make
him wild. Yes, that's the kind of man he is. Fearfully jealous, and
such a temper! If I married him, I'm quite sure he would beat me
some day.'

'Oh!' Emmeline exclaimed. 'How can you have anything to do with such
a man?'

'He's very nice sometimes,' answered Louise, thoughtfully.

'But do you really mean that he is "rough and coarse"?'

'Yes, I do. You couldn't call him a gentleman. I've never seen his
people; they live somewhere a long way off; and I shouldn't wonder
if they are a horrid lot. His last letter was quite insulting. He
said--let me see, what was it? Yes--"You have neither heart nor
brains, and I shall do my best not to waste another thought on you?"
What do you think of that?'

'It seems very extraordinary, my dear. How can he write to you in
that way if you never gave him any encouragement?'

'Well, but I suppose I have done. We've met on the Common now and
then, and--and that kind of thing. I'm afraid you're shocked, Mrs.
Mumford. I know it isn't the way that nice people behave, and I'm
going to give it up.'

'Does your mother know him?'

'Oh, yes! there's no secret about it. Mother rather likes him. Of
course he behaves himself when he's at the house. I've a good mind
to ask him to call here so that you could see him. Yes, I should
like you to see him. You wouldn't mind?'

'Not if you really wish it, Louise. But--I can't help thinking you
exaggerate his faults.'

'Not a bit. He's a regular brute when he gets angry.'

'My dear,' Emmeline interposed softly, 'that isn't quite a ladylike
expression.'

'No, it isn't. Thank you, Mrs. Mumford. I meant to say he is
horrid--very disagreeable. Then there's something else I want to tell you
about. Cissy Higgins--that's Mr. Higgins's daughter, you know--is
half engaged to a man called Bowling--an awful idiot--'

'I don't think I would use that word, dear.'

'Thank you, Mrs. Mumford. I mean to say he's a regular silly. But
he's in a very good position--a partner in Jannaway Brothers of
Woolwich, though he isn't thirty yet. Well, now, what do you think?
Mr. Bowling doesn't seem to know his own mind, and just lately he's
been paying so much attention to _me_ that Cissy has got quite
frantic about it. This was really and truly the reason why I left
home.'

'I see,' murmured the listener, with a look of genuine interest.

'Yes. They wanted to get me out of the way. There wasn't the
slightest fear that I should try to cut Cissy Higgins out; but it
was getting very awkward for her, I admit. Now that's the kind of
thing that doesn't go on among nice people, isn't it?'

'But what do you mean, Louise, when you say that Miss Higgins and
Mr.--Mr. Bowling are _half_ engaged?'

'Oh, I mean she has refused him once, just for form's sake; but he
knows very well she means to have him. People of your kind don't do
that sort of thing, do they?'

'I hardly know,' Emmeline replied, colouring a little at certain
private reminiscences. 'And am I to understand that you wouldn't on
any account listen to Mr. Bowling?'

Louise laughed.

'Oh, there's no knowing what I might do to spite Cissy. We hate each
other, of course. But I can't fancy myself marrying him, He has a
long nose, and talks through it. And he says "think you" for "thank
you," and he sings--oh, to hear him sing! I can't bear the man.'

The matter of this conversation Emmeline reported to her husband at
night, and they agreed in the hope that neither Mr. Cobb nor Mr.
Bowling would make an appearance at "Runnymede." Mumford opined that
these individuals were "cads." Small wonder, he said, that the girl
wished to enter a new social sphere. His wife, on the other hand,
had a suspicion that Miss Derrick would not be content to see the
last of Mr. Cobb. He, the electrical engineer, or whatever he was,
could hardly be such a ruffian as the girl depicted. His words, 'You
have neither heart nor brains,' seemed to indicate anything but a
coarse mind.

'But what a bad-tempered lot they are!' Mumford observed. 'I suppose
people of that sort quarrel and abuse each other merely to pass the
time. They seem to be just one degree above the roughs who come to
blows and get into the police court. You must really do your best to
get the girl out of it; I'm sure she is worthy of better things.'

'She is--in one way,' answered his wife judicially. 'But her
education stopped too soon. I doubt if it's possible to change her
very much. And--I really should like, after all, to see Mr. Cobb.'

Mumford broke into a laugh.

'There you go! The eternal feminine. You'll have her married in six
months.'

'Don't be vulgar, Clarence. And we've talked enough of Louise for
the present.'

Miss Derrick's presentiment that a letter from Mr. Cobb would soon
reach her was justified the next day; it arrived in the afternoon,
readdressed from Tulse Hill. Emmeline observed the eagerness with
which this epistle was pounced upon and carried off for private
perusal. She saw, too, that in half-an-hour's time Louise left the
house--doubtless to post a reply. But, to her surprise, not a word
of the matter escaped Miss Derrick during the whole evening.

In her school-days, Louise had learned to "play the piano," but,
caring little or nothing for music, she had hardly touched a key for
several years. Now the idea possessed her that she must resume her
practising, and to-day she had spent hours at the piano, with
painful effect upon Mrs. Mumford's nerves. After dinner she offered
to play to Mumford, and he, good-natured fellow, stood by her to
turn over the leaves. Emmeline, with fancy work in her hands,
watched the two. She was not one of the most foolish of her sex, but
it relieved her when Clarence moved away.

The next morning Louise was an hour late for breakfast. She came
down when Mumford had left the house, and Emmeline saw with surprise
that she was dressed for going out.

'Just a cup of coffee, please. I've no appetite this morning, and I
want to catch a train for Victoria as soon as possible.'

'When will you be back?'

'Oh, I don't quite know. To tea, I think.'

The girl had all at once grown reticent, and her lips showed the
less amiable possibilities of their contour.




CHAPTER III


At dinner-time she had not returned. It being Saturday, Mumford was
back early in the afternoon, and Miss Derrick's absence caused no
grief. Emmeline could play with baby in the garden, whilst her
husband smoked his pipe and looked on in the old comfortable way.
They already felt that domestic life was not quite the same with a
stranger to share it. Doubtless they would get used to the new
restraints; but Miss Derrick must not expect them to disorganise
their mealtimes on her account. Promptly at half-past seven they sat
down to dine, and had just risen from the table, when Louise
appeared.

She was in excellent spirits, without a trace of the morning's
ill-humour. No apologies! If she didn't feel quite free to come and
go, without putting people out, there would be no comfort in life. A
slice of the joint, that was all she wanted, and she would have done
in a few minutes.

'I've taken tickets for Toole's Theatre on Monday night. You must
both come. You can, can't you?'

Mumford and his wife glanced at each other. Yes, they could go; it
was very kind of Miss Derrick; but--

'That's all right, it'll be jolly. The idea struck me in the train,
as I was going up; so I took a cab from Victoria and booked the
places first thing. Third row from the front, dress circle; the best
I could do. Please let me have my dinner alone. Mrs. Mumford, I want
to tell you something afterwards.'

Clarence went round to see his friend Fentiman, with whom he usually
had a chat on Saturday evening. Emmeline was soon joined by the
guest in the drawing-room.

'There, you may read that,' said Louise, holding out a letter. 'It's
from Mr. Cobb; came yesterday, but I didn't care to talk about it
then. Yes, please read it; I want you to.'

Reluctantly, but with curiosity, Emmeline glanced over the sheet.
Mr. Cobb wrote in ignorance of Miss Derrick's having left home. It
was a plain, formal letter, giving a brief account of his doings in
Ireland, and making a request that Louise would meet him, if
possible, on Streatham Common, at three o'clock on Saturday
afternoon. And he signed himself--'Very sincerely yours.'

'I made up my mind at once,' said the girl, 'that I wouldn't meet
him. That kind of thing will have to stop. I'm not going to think
any more of him, and it's better to make him understand it at
once--isn't it?'

Emmeline heartily concurred.

'Still,' pursued the other, with an air of great satisfaction, 'I
thought I had better go home for this afternoon. Because when he
didn't see me on the Common he was pretty sure to call at the house,
and I didn't want mother or Cissy to be talking about me to him
before he had heard my own explanation.'

'Didn't you answer the letter?' asked Emmeline.

'No. I just sent a line to mother, to let her know I was coming over
to-day, so that she might stay at home. Well, and it happened just
as I thought. Mr. Cobb came to the house at half-past three. But
before that I'd had a terrible row with Cissy. That isn't a nice
expression, I know, but it really was one of our worst quarrels. Mr.
Bowling hasn't been near since I left, and Cissy is furious. She
said such things that I had to tell her very plainly what I thought
of her; and she positively foamed at the mouth! "Now look here," she
said, "if I find out that he goes to Sutton, you'll see what will
happen." "_What_ will happen?" I asked. "Father will stop your
allowance, and you'll have to get on as best you can." "Oh, very
well," I said, "in that case I shall marry Mr. Bowling." You should
have seen her rage! "You said you wouldn't marry him if he had ten
thousand a year!" she screamed. "I dare say I did; but if I've
nothing to live upon--" "You can marry your Mr. Cobb, can't you?"
And she almost cried; and I should have felt sorry for her if she
hadn't made me so angry. "No," I said, "I can't marry Mr. Cobb. And
I never dreamt of marrying Mr. Cobb. And--"'

Emmeline interposed.

'Really, Louise, that kind of talk isn't at all ladylike. What a
pity you went home.'

'Yes, I was sorry for it afterwards. I shan't go again for a long
time; I promise you I won't. However, Mr. Cobb came, and I saw him
alone. He was astonished when he heard what had been going on; he
was astonished at _me_, too--I mean, the way I spoke. I wanted him
to understand at once that there was nothing between us; I talked in
rather a--you know the sort of way.' She raised her chin slightly,
and looked down from under her eyelids. 'Oh, I assure you I behaved
quite nicely. But he got into a rage, as he always does, and began
to call me names, and I wouldn't stand it. "Mr. Cobb," I said, very
severely, "either you will conduct yourself properly, or you will
leave the house." Then he tried another tone, and said very
different things--the kind of thing one likes to hear, you know; but
I pretended that I didn't care for it a bit. "It's all over between
us then?" he shouted at last; yes, really shouted, and I'm sure
people must have heard. "All over?" I said. "But there never _was_
anything--nothing serious." "Oh, all right. Good-bye, then." And off
he rushed. And I dare say I've seen the last of him--for a time.'

'Now do try to live quietly, my dear,' said Emmeline. 'Go on with
your music, and read a little each day--'

'Yes, that's just what I'm going to do, dear Mrs. Mumford. And your
friends will be here to-morrow; it'll be so quiet and nice. And on
Monday we shall go to the theatre, just for a change. And I'm not
going to think of those people. It's all settled. I shall live very
quietly indeed.'

She banged on the piano till nearly eleven o'clock, and went off to
bed with a smile of virtuous contentment.

The guests who arrived on Sunday morning were Mr. and Mrs. Grove,
Mr. Bilton, and Mr. Dunnill. Mrs. Grove was Emmeline's elder sister,
a merry, talkative, kindly woman. Aware of the circumstances, she at
once made friends with Miss Derrick, and greatly pleased that young
lady by a skilful blending of "superior" talk with easy homeliness.
Mr. Bilton, a stockbroker's clerk, represented the better kind of
City young man--athletic, yet intelligent, spirited without
vulgarity a breezy, good-humoured, wholesome fellow. He came down on
his bicycle, and would return in the same way. Louise at once made a
resolve to learn cycling.

'I wish you lived at Sutton, Mr. Bilton. I should ask you to teach
me.'

'I'm really very sorry that I don't,' replied the young man
discreetly.

'Oh, never mind. I'll find somebody.'

The fourth arrival, Mr. Dunnill, was older and less affable. He
talked chiefly with Mr. Grove, a very quiet, somewhat careworn man;
neither of them seemed able to shake off business, but they did not
obtrude it on the company in general. The day passed pleasantly, but
in Miss Derrick's opinion, rather soberly. Doing her best to
fascinate Mr. Bilton, she felt a slight disappointment at her
inability to engross his attention, and at the civil friendliness
which he thought a sufficient reply to her gay sallies. For so
good-looking and well-dressed a man he struck her as singularly
reserved. But perhaps he was "engaged"; yes, that must be the
explanation. When the guests had left, she put a plain question to
Mrs. Mumford.

'I don't _think_ he is engaged,' answered Emmeline, who on the whole
was satisfied with Miss Derrick's demeanour throughout the day.

'Oh! But, of course, he _may_ be, without you knowing it. Or is it
always made known?'

'There's no rule about it, my dear.'

'Well, they're very nice people,' said Louise, with a little sigh.
'And I like your sister so much. I'm glad she asked me to go and see
her. Is Mr. Bilton often at her house?--Don't misunderstand me, Mrs.
Mumford. It's only that I _do_ like men's society; there's no harm,
is there? And people like Mr. Bilton are very different from those
I've known; and I want to see more of them, you know.'

'There's no harm in saying that to _me_, Louise,' replied Mrs.
Mumford. 'But pray be careful not to seem "forward." People
think--and say--such disagreeable things.'

Miss Derrick was grateful, and again gave an assurance that repose
and modesty should be the rule of her life.

At the theatre on Monday evening she exhibited a childlike enjoyment
which her companions could not but envy. The freshness of her
sensibilities was indeed remarkable, and Emmeline observed with
pleasure that her mind seemed to have a very wholesome tone. Louise
might commit follies, and be guilty of bad taste to any extent, but
nothing in her savoured of depravity.

Tuesday she spent at home, pretending to read a little, and
obviously thinking a great deal. On Wednesday morning she proposed
of a sudden that Emmeline should go up to town with her on a
shopping expedition. They had already turned over her wardrobe,
numerous articles whereof were condemned by Mrs. Mumford's taste,
and by Louise cheerfully sacrificed; she could not rest till new
purchases had been made. So, after early luncheon, they took train
to Victoria, Louise insisting that all the expenses should be hers.
By five o'clock she had laid out some fifteen pounds, vastly to her
satisfaction. They took tea at a restaurant, and reached Sutton not
long before Mumford's return.

On Friday they went to London again, to call upon Mrs. Grove. Louise
promised that this should be her last "outing" for a whole week. She
admitted a feeling of restlessness, but after to-day she would
overcome it. And that night she apologised formally to Mumford for
taking his wife so much from home.

'Please don't think I shall always be running about like this. I
feel that I'm settling down. We are going to be very comfortable and
quiet.'

And, to the surprise of her friends, more than a week went by before
she declared that a day in town was absolutely necessary. Mr.
Higgins had sent her a fresh supply of money, as there were still a
few things she needed to purchase. But this time Emmeline begged her
to go alone, and Louise seemed quite satisfied with the arrangement.

Early in the afternoon, as Mrs. Mumford was making ready to go out,
the servant announced to her that a gentleman had called to see Miss
Derrick; on learning that Miss Derrick was away, he had asked sundry
questions, and ended by requesting an interview with Mrs. Mumford.
His name was Cobb.

'Show him into the drawing-room,' said Emmeline, a trifle agitated.
'I will be down in a few moments.'

Beset by anxious anticipations, she entered the room, and saw before
her a figure not wholly unlike what she had imagined: a wiry,
resolute-looking man, with knitted brows, lips close-set, and heavy
feet firmly planted on the carpet. He was respectably dressed, but
nothing more, and in his large bare hands held a brown hat marked
with a grease spot. One would have judged him a skilled mechanic.
When he began to speak, his blunt but civil phrases were in keeping
with this impression. He had not the tone of an educated man, yet
committed no vulgar errors.

'My name is Cobb. I must beg your pardon for troubling you. Perhaps
you have heard of me from Miss Derrick?'

'Yes, Mr. Cobb, your name has been mentioned,' Emmeline replied
nervously. 'Will you sit down?'

'Thank you, I will.'

He twisted his hat about, and seemed to prepare with difficulty the
next remark, which at length burst, rather than fell, from his lips.

'I wanted to see Miss Derrick. I suppose she is still living with
you? They told me so.'

A terrible man, thought Emmeline, when roused to anger; his words
must descend like sledge-hammers. And it would not take much to
anger him. For all that, he had by no means a truculent countenance.
He was trying to smile, and his features softened agreeably enough.
The more closely she observed him, the less grew Emmeline's wonder
that Louise felt an interest in the man.

'Miss Derrick is likely to stay with us for some time, I believe.
She has only gone to town, to do some shopping.'

'I see. When I met her last she talked a good deal about you, Mrs.
Mumford, and that's why I thought I would ask to see you. You have a
good deal of influence over her.'

