satisfaction in his countenance when Louise appeared than he evinced
in words.

'Oh, I don't care,' she answered. 'It won't rain much, and I've
brought my umbrella, and I've nothing on that will take any harm.'

She had, indeed, dressed herself in her least demonstrative costume.
Cobb wore the usual garb of his leisure hours, which was better than
that in which he had called the other day at "Runnymede." For some
minutes they walked towards Streatham Common without interchange of
a word, and with no glance at each other. Then the man coughed, and
said bluntly that he was glad Louise had come.

'Well, I wanted to see you,' was her answer.

'What about?'

'I don't think I shall be able to stay with the Mumfords. They're
very nice people, but they're not exactly my sort, and we don't get
on very well. Where had I better go?'

'Go? Why home, of course. The best place for you.'

Cobb was prepared for a hot retort, but it did not come. After a
moment's reflection, Louise said quietly:

'I can't go home. I've quarrelled with them too badly. You haven't
seen mother lately? Then I must tell you how things are.'

She did so, with no concealment save of the correspondence with Mr.
Bowling, and the not unimportant statements concerning him which she
had made to Mrs. Mumford. In talking with Cobb, Louise seemed to
drop a degree or so in social status; her language was much less
careful than when she conversed with the Mumfords, and even her
voice struck a note of less refinement. Decidedly she was more
herself, if that could be said of one who very rarely made conscious
disguise of her characteristics.

'Better stay where you are, then, for the present,' said Cobb, when
he had listened attentively. 'I dare say you can get along well
enough with the people, if you try.'

'That's all very well; but what about paying them? I shall owe three
guineas for every week I stop.'

'It's a great deal, and they ought to feed you very well for it,'
replied the other, smiling rather sourly.

'Don't be vulgar. I suppose you think I ought to live on a few
shillings a week.'

'Lots of people have to. But there's no reason why _you_ should. But
look here: why should you be quarrelling with your people now about
that fellow Bowling? You don't see him anywhere, do you?'

He flashed a glance at her, and Louise answered with a defiant
motion of the head.

'No, I don't. But they put the blame on me, all the same. I
shouldn't wonder if they think I'm trying to get him.'

She opened her umbrella, for heavy drops had begun to fall; they
pattered on Cobb's hard felt hat, and Louise tried to shelter him as
well as herself.

'Never mind me,' he said. 'And here, let me hold that thing over
you. If you just put your arm in mine, it'll be easier. That's the
way. Take two steps to my one; that's it.'

Again they were silent for a few moments. They had reached the
Common, and Cobb struck along a path most likely to be unfrequented.
No wind was blowing; the rain fell in steady spots that could all
but be counted, and the air grew dark.

'Well, I can only propose one thing,' sounded the masculine voice.
'You can get out of it by marrying me.'

Louise gave a little laugh, rather timid than scornful.

'Yes, I suppose I can. But it's an awkward way. It would be rather
like using a sledge-hammer to crack a nut.'

'It'll come sooner or later,' asserted Cobb, with genial confidence.

'That's what I don't like about you.' Louise withdrew her arm
petulantly. 'You always speak as if I couldn't help myself. Don't
you suppose I have any choice?'

'Plenty, no doubt,' was the grim answer.

'Whenever we begin to quarrel it's your fault,' pursued Miss
Derrick, with unaccustomed moderation of tone. 'I never knew a man
who behaved like you do. You seem to think the way to make anyone
like you is to bully them. We should have got on very much better if
you had tried to be pleasant.'

'I don't think we've got along badly, all things considered,' Cobb
replied, as if after weighing a doubt. 'We'd a good deal rather be
together than apart, it seems to me; or else, why do we keep
meeting? And I don't want to bully anybody--least of all, you. It's
a way I have of talking, I suppose. You must judge a man by his
actions and his meaning, not by the tone of his voice. You know very
well what a great deal I think of you. Of course I don't like it
when you begin to speak as if you were only playing with me; nobody
would.'

'I'm serious enough,' said Louise, trying to hold the umbrella over
her companion, and only succeeding in directing moisture down the
back of his neck. 'And it's partly through you that I've got into
such difficulties.'

'How do you make that out?'

'If it wasn't for you, I should very likely marry Mr. Bowling.'

'Oh, he's asked you, has he?' cried Cobb, staring at her. 'Why
didn't you tell me that before?--Don't let me stand in your way. I
dare say he's just the kind of man for you. At all events, he's like
you in not knowing his own mind.'

'Go on! Go on!' Louise exclaimed carelessly. 'There's plenty of
time. Say all you've got to say.'

From the gloom of the eastward sky came a rattling of thunder, like
quick pistol-shots. Cobb checked his steps.

'We mustn't go any further. You're getting wet, and the rain isn't
likely to stop.'

'I shall not go back,' Louise answered, 'until something has been
settled.' And she stood before him, her eyes cast down, whilst Cobb
looked at the darkening sky. 'I want to know what's going to become
of me. The Mumfords won't keep me much longer, and I don't wish to
stay where I'm not wanted.'

'Let us walk down the hill.'

A flash of lightning made Louise start, and the thunder rattled
again. But only light drops were falling. The girl stood her ground.

'I want to know what I am to do. If you can't help me, say so, and
let me go my own way.'

'Of course I can help you. That is, if you'll be honest with me. I
want to know, first of all, whether you've been encouraging that man
Bowling.'

'No, I haven't.'

'Very well, I believe you. And now I'll make you a fair offer. Marry
me as soon as I can make the arrangements, and I'll pay all you owe,
and see that you are in comfortable lodgings until I've time to get
a house. It could be done before I go to Bristol, and then, of
course, you could go with me.'

'You speak,' said Louise, after a short silence, 'just as if you
were making an agreement with a servant.'

'That's all nonsense, and you know it. I've told you how I think,
often enough, in letters, and I'm not good at saying it. Look here,
I don't think it's very wise to stand out in the middle of the
Common in a thunderstorm. Let us walk on, and I think I would put
down your umbrella.'

'It wouldn't trouble you much if I were struck with lightning.'

'All right, take it so. I shan't trouble to contradict.'

Louise followed his advice, and they began to walk quickly down the
slope towards Streatham. Neither spoke until they were in the high
road again. A strong wind was driving the rain-clouds to other
regions and the thunder had ceased; there came a grey twilight; rows
of lamps made a shimmering upon the wet ways.

'What sort of a house would you take?' Louise asked suddenly.

'Oh, a decent enough house. What kind do you want?'

'Something like the Mumfords'. It needn't be quite so large,' she
added quickly; 'but a house with a garden, in a nice road, and in a
respectable part.'

'That would suit me well enough,' answered Cobb cheerfully. 'You
seem to think I want to drag you down, but you're very much
mistaken. I'm doing pretty well, and likely, as far as I can see, to
do better. I don't grudge you money; far from it. All I want to know
is, that you'll marry me for my own sake.'

He dropped his voice, not to express tenderness, but because other
people were near. Upon Louise, however, it had a pleasing effect,
and she smiled.

'Very well,' she made answer, in the same subdued tone. 'Then let us
settle it in that way.'

They talked amicably for the rest of the time that they spent
together. It was nearly an hour, and never before had they succeeded
in conversing so long without a quarrel. Louise became light-hearted
and mirthful; her companion, though less abandoned to the mood of
the moment, wore a hopeful countenance. Through all his roughness,
Cobb was distinguished by a personal delicacy which no doubt had
impressed Louise, say what she might of pretended fears. At parting,
he merely shook hands with her, as always.




CHAPTER VII


Glad of a free evening, Emmeline, after dinner, walked round to Mrs.
Fentiman's. Louise had put a restraint upon the wonted friendly
intercourse between the Mumfords and their only familiar
acquaintances at Sutton. Mrs. Fentiman liked to talk of purely
domestic matters, and in a stranger's presence she was never at
ease. Coming alone, and when the children were all safe in bed,
Emmeline had a warm welcome. For the first time she spoke of her
troublesome guest without reserve. This chat would have been restful
and enjoyable but for a most unfortunate remark that fell from the
elder lady, a perfectly innocent mention of something her husband
had told her, but, secretly, so disturbing Mrs. Mumford that, after
hearing it, she got away as soon as possible, and walked quickly
home with dark countenance.

It was ten o'clock; Louise had not yet returned, but might do so any
moment. Wishing to be sure of privacy in a conversation with her
husband, Emmeline summoned him from his book to the bedroom.

'Well, what has happened now?' exclaimed Mumford. 'If this kind of
thing goes on much longer I shall feel inclined to take a lodging in
town.'

'I have heard something very strange. I can hardly believe it; there
must have been a mistake.'

'What is it? Really, one's nerves--'

'Is it true that, on Thursday evening, you and Miss Derrick were
seen talking together at the station? Thursday: the day she went off
and came back again after dinner.'

Mumford would gladly have got out of this scrape at any expense of
mendacity, but he saw at once how useless such an attempt would
prove. Exasperated by the result of his indiscretion, and resenting,
as all men do, the undignified necessity of defending himself, he
flew into a rage. Yes, it _was_ true, and what next? The girl had
waylaid him, begged him to intercede for her with his wife. Of
course it would have been better to come home and reveal the matter;
he didn't do so because it seemed to put him in a silly position.
For Heaven's sake, let the whole absurd business be forgotten and
done with!

Emmeline, though not sufficiently enlightened to be above small
jealousies, would have been ashamed to declare her feeling with the
energy of unsophisticated female nature. She replied coldly and
loftily that the matter, of course, _was_ done with; that it
interested her no more; but that she could not help regretting an
instance of secretiveness such as she had never before discovered in
her husband. Surely he had put himself in a much sillier position,
as things turned out, than if he had followed the dictates of
honour.

'The upshot of it is this,' cried Mumford: 'Miss Derrick has to
leave the house, and, if necessary, I shall tell her so myself.'

Again Emmeline was cold and lofty. There was no necessity whatever
for any further communication between Clarence and Miss Derrick. Let
the affair be left entirely in her hands. Indeed, she must very
specially request that Clarence would have nothing more to do with
Miss Derrick's business. Whereupon Mumford took offence. Did
Emmeline wish to imply that there had been anything improper in his
behaviour beyond the paltry indiscretion to which he had confessed?
No; Emmeline was thankful to say that she did not harbour base
suspicions. Then, rejoined Mumford, let this be the last word of a
difference as hateful to him as to her. And he left the room.

His wife did not linger more than a minute behind him, and she sat
in the drawing-room to await Miss Derrick's return; Mumford kept
apart in what was called the library. To her credit, Emmeline tried
hard to believe that she had learnt the whole truth; her mind, as
she had justly declared, was not prone to ignoble imaginings; but
acquitting her husband by no means involved an equal charity towards
Louise. Hitherto uncertain in her judgment, she had now the relief
of an assurance that Miss Derrick was not at all a proper person to
entertain as a guest, on whatever terms. The incident of the railway
station proved her to be utterly lacking in self-respect, in
feminine modesty, even if her behaviour merited no darker
description. Emmeline could now face with confidence the scene from
which she had shrunk; not only was it a duty to insist upon Miss
Derrick's departure, it would be a positive pleasure.

Louise very soon entered; she came into the room with her brightest
look, and cried gaily:

'Oh, I hope I haven't kept you waiting for me. Are you alone?'

'No. I have been out.'

'Had you the storm here? I'm not going to keep you talking; you look
tired.'

'I am rather,' said Emmeline, with reserve. She had no intention of
allowing Louise to suspect the real cause of what she was about to
say--that would have seemed to her undignified; but she could not
speak quite naturally. 'Still, I should be glad if you would sit
down for a minute.'

The girl took a chair and began to draw off her gloves. She
understood what was coming; it appeared in Emmeline's face.

'Something to say to me, Mrs. Mumford?'

'I hope you won't think me unkind. I feel obliged to ask you when
you will be able to make new arrangements.'

'You would like me to go soon?' said Louise, inspecting her
finger-nails, and speaking without irritation.

'I am sorry to say that I think it better you should leave us.
Forgive this plain speaking, Miss Derrick. It's always best to be
perfectly straightforward, isn't it?'

Whether she felt the force of this innuendo or not, Louise took it
in good part. As if the idea had only just struck her, she looked up
cheerfully.

'You're quite right, Mrs. Mumford. I'm sure you've been very kind to
me, and I've had a very pleasant time here, but it wouldn't do for
me to stay longer. May I wait over to-morrow, just till Wednesday
morning, to have an answer to a letter?'

'Certainly, if it is quite understood that there will be no delay
beyond that. There are circumstances--private matters--I don't feel
quite able to explain. But I must be sure that you will have left us
by Wednesday afternoon.'

'You may be sure of it. I will write a line and post it to-night,
for it to go as soon as possible.'

Therewith Louise stood up and, smiling, withdrew. Emmeline was both
relieved and surprised; she had not thought it possible for the girl
to conduct herself at such a juncture with such perfect propriety.
An outbreak of ill-temper, perhaps of insolence, had seemed more
than likely; at best she looked for tears and entreaties. Well, it
was over, and by Wednesday the house would be restored to its
ancient calm. Ancient, indeed! One could not believe that so short a
time had passed since Miss Derrick first entered the portals. Only
one more day.

'Oh, blindness to the future, kindly given, That each may fill the
circle marked by Heaven.' At school, Emmeline had learnt and recited
these lines; but it was long since they had recurred to her memory.

In ten minutes Louise had written her letter. She went out,
returned, and looked in at the drawing-room, with a pleasant smile.
'Good-night, Mrs. Mumford.' 'Good-night, Miss Derrick.' For the
grace of the thing, Emmeline would have liked to say 'Louise,' but
could not bring her lips to utter the name.

About a year ago there had been a little misunderstanding between
Mr. and Mrs. Mumford, which lasted for some twenty-four hours,
during which they had nothing to say to each other. To-night they
found themselves in a similar situation, and remembered that last
difference, and wondered, both of them, at the harmony of their
married life. It was in truth wonderful enough; twelve months
without a shadow of ill-feeling between them. The reflection
compelled Mumford to speak when his head was on the pillow.

'Emmy, we're making fools of ourselves. Just tell me what you have
done.'

'I can't see how _I_ am guilty of foolishness,' was the clear-cut
reply.

'Then why are you angry with me?'

'I don't like deceit.'

'Hanged if I don't dislike it just as much. When is that girl
going?'

Emmeline made known the understanding at which she had arrived, and
her husband breathed an exclamation of profound thankfulness. But
peace was not perfectly restored.

In another room, Louise lay communing with her thoughts, which were
not at all disagreeable. She had written to Cobb, telling him what
had happened, and asking him to let her know by Wednesday morning
what she was to do. She could not go home; he must not bid her do
so; but she would take a lodging wherever he liked. The position
seemed romantic and enjoyable. Not till after her actual marriage
should the people at home know what had become of her. She was
marrying with utter disregard of all her dearest ambitions all the
same, she had rather be the wife of Cobb than of anyone else. Her
stepfather might recover his old kindness and generosity as soon as
he knew she no longer stood in Cissy's way, and that she had never
seriously thought of marrying Mr. Bowling. Had she not thought of
it? The question did not enter her own mind, and she would have been
quite incapable of passing a satisfactory cross-examination on the
subject.

Mrs. Mumford, foreseeing the difficulty of spending the next day at
home, told her husband in the morning that she would have early
luncheon and go to see Mrs. Grove.

'And I should like you to fetch me from there, after business,
please.'

'I will,' answered Clarence readily. He mentally added a hope that
his wife did not mean to supervise him henceforth and for ever. If
so, their troubles were only beginning.

At breakfast, Louise continued to be discretion itself. She talked
of her departure on the morrow as though it had long been a settled
thing, and was quite unconnected with disagreeable circumstances.
Only midway in the morning did Mrs. Mumford, who had been busy with
her child, speak of the early luncheon and her journey to town. She
hoped Miss Derrick would not mind being left alone.

'Oh, don't speak of it,' answered Louise. 'I've lots to do. You'll
give my kind regards to Mrs. Grove?'

So they ate together at midday, rather silently, but with faces
composed. And Emmeline, after a last look into the nursery, hastened
away to catch her train. She had no misgivings; during her absence,
all would be well as ever.

Louise passed the time without difficulty, and at seven o'clock made
an excellent dinner. This evening no reply could be expected from
Cobb, as he was not likely to have received her letter of last night
till his return home from business. Still, there might be something
from someone; she always looked eagerly for the postman.

The weather was gloomy. Not long after eight the housemaid brought
in a lighted lamp, and set it, as usual, upon the little black
four-legged table in the drawing-room. And in the same moment the
knocker of the front door sounded a vigorous rat-tat-tat, a
visitor's summons.




CHAPTER VIII


'It may be someone calling upon me,' said Louise to the servant.
'Let me know the name before you show anyone in.'

'Of course, miss,' replied the domestic, with pert familiarity, and
took her time in arranging the shade of the lamp. When she returned
from the door it was to announce, smilingly, that Mr. Cobb wished to
see Miss Derrick.

'Please to show him in.'

Louise stood in an attitude of joyous excitement, her eyes
sparkling. But at the first glance she perceived that her lover's
mood was by no means correspondingly gay. Cobb stalked forward and
kept a stern gaze upon her, but said nothing.

'Well? You got my letter, I suppose?'

'What letter?'

He had not been home since breakfast-time, so Louise's appeal to him
for advice lay waiting his arrival. Impatiently, she described the
course of events. As soon as she had finished, Cobb threw his hat
aside and addressed her harshly.

'I want to know what you mean by writing to your sister that you are
going to marry Bowling. I saw your mother this morning, and that's
what she told me. It must have been only a day or two ago that you
said that. Just explain, if you please. I'm about sick of this kind
of thing, and I'll have the truth out of you.'

His anger had never taken such a form as this; for the first time
Louise did in truth feel afraid of him. She shrank away, her heart
throbbed, and her tongue refused its office.

'Say what you mean by it!' Cobb repeated, in a voice that was all
the more alarming because he kept it low.

'Did you write that to your sister?'

'Yes--but I never meant it--it was just to make her angry--'

'You expect me to believe that? And, if it's true, doesn't it make
you out a nice sort of girl? But I don't believe it You've been
thinking of him in that way all along; and you've been writing to
him, or meeting him, since you came here. What sort of behaviour do
you call this?'

Louise was recovering self-possession; the irritability of her own
temper began to support her courage.

'What if I have? I'd never given _you_ any promise till last night,
had I? I was free to marry anyone I liked, wasn't I? What do _you_
mean by coming here and going on like this? I've told you the truth
about that letter, and I've always told you the truth about
everything. If you don't like it, say so and go.'

Cobb was impressed by the energy of her defence. He looked her
straight in the eyes, and paused a moment; then spoke less
violently.

'You haven't told me the _whole_ truth. I want to know when you saw
Bowling last.'

'I haven't seen him since I left home.'

'When did you write to him last?'

'The same day I wrote to Cissy. And I shall answer no more
questions.'

'Of course not. But that's quite enough. You've been playing a
double game; if you haven't told lies, you've acted them. What sort
of a wife would you make? How could I ever believe a word you said?
I shall have no more to do with you.'

He turned away, and, in the violence of the movement, knocked over a
little toy chair, one of those perfectly useless, and no less ugly,
impediments which stand about the floor of a well-furnished
drawing-room. Too angry to stoop and set the object on its legs
again, he strode towards the door. Louise followed him.

'You are going?' she asked, in a struggling voice.

Cobb paid no attention, and all but reached the door. She laid a
hand upon him.

'You are going?'

The touch and the voice checked him. Again he turned abruptly and
seized the hand that rested upon his arm.

'Why are you stopping me? What do you want with me? I'm to help you
out of the fix you've got into, is that it? I'm to find you a
lodging, and take no end of trouble, and then in a week's time get a
letter to say that you want nothing more to do with me.'

Louise was pale with anger and fear, and as many other emotions as
her little heart and brain could well hold. She did not look her
best--far from it but the man saw something in her eyes which threw
a fresh spell upon him. Still grasping her one hand, he caught her
by the other arm, held her as far off as he could, and glared
passionately as he spoke.

'What do you want?'

'You know--I've told you the truth--'

His grasp hurt her; she tried to release herself, and moved
backwards. For a moment Cobb left her free; she moved backward
again, her eyes drawing him on. She felt her power, and could not be
content with thus much exercise of it.

'You may go if you like. But you understand, if you do--'

Cobb, inflamed with desire and jealousy, made an effort to recapture
her. Louise sprang away from him; but immediately behind her lay the
foolish little chair which he had kicked over, and just beyond
_that_ stood the scarcely less foolish little table which supported
the heavy lamp, with its bowl of coloured glass and its spreading
yellow shade. She tottered back, fell with all her weight against
the table, and brought the lamp crashing to the floor. A shriek of
terror from Louise, from her lover a shout of alarm, blended with
the sound of breaking glass. In an instant a great flame shot up
half way to the ceiling. The lamp-shade was ablaze; the
much-embroidered screen, Mrs. Mumford's wedding present, forthwith
caught fire from a burning tongue that ran along the carpet; and
Louise's dress, well sprinkled with paraffin, aided the
conflagration. Cobb, of course, saw only the danger to the girl. He
seized the woollen hearthrug and tried to wrap it about her; but
with screams of pain and frantic struggles, Louise did her best to
thwart his purpose.

The window was open, and now a servant, rushing in to see what the
uproar meant, gave the blaze every benefit of draught.

'Bring water!' roared Cobb, who had just succeeded in extinguishing
Louise's dress, and was carrying her, still despite her struggles,
out of the room. 'Here, one of you take Miss Derrick to the next
house. Bring water, you!'

All three servants were scampering and screeching about the hall.
Cobb caught hold of one of them and all but twisted her arm out of
its socket. At his fierce command, the woman supported Louise into
the garden, and thence, after a minute or two of faintness on the
sufferer's part, led her to the gate of the neighbouring house. The
people who lived there chanced to be taking the air on their front
lawn. Without delay, Louise was conveyed beneath the roof, and her
host, a man of energy, sped towards the fire to be of what
assistance he could.

The lamp-shade, the screen, the little table and the diminutive
chair blazed gallantly, and with such a volleying of poisonous fumes
that Cobb could scarce hold his ground to do battle. Louise out of
the way, he at once became cool and resourceful. Before a flame
could reach the window he had rent down the flimsy curtains and
flung them outside. Bellowing for the water which was so long in
coming, he used the hearthrug to some purpose on the outskirts of
the bonfire, but had to keep falling back for fresh air. Then
appeared a pail and a can, which he emptied effectively, and next
moment sounded the voice of the gentleman from next door.

'Have you a garden hose? Set it on to the tap, and bring it in
here.'

The hose was brought into play, and in no great time the last flame
had flickered out amid a deluge. When all danger was at an end, one
of the servants, the nurse-girl, uttered a sudden shriek; it merely
signified that she had now thought for the first time of the little
child asleep upstairs. Aided by the housemaid, she rushed to the
nursery, snatched her charge from bed, and carried the unhappy
youngster into the breezes of the night, where he screamed at the
top of his gamut.

Cobb, when he no longer feared that the house would be burnt down,
hurried to inquire after Louise. She lay on a couch, wrapped in a
dressing-gown; for the side and one sleeve of her dress had been
burnt away. Her moaning never ceased; there was a fire-mark on the
lower part of her face, and she stared with eyes of terror and
anguish at whoever approached her. Already a doctor had been sent
for, and Cobb, reporting that all was safe at 'Runnymede,' wished to
remove her at once to her own bed room, and the strangers were eager
to assist.

'What will the Mumfords say?' Louise asked of a sudden, trying to
raise herself.

'Leave all that to me,' Cobb replied reassuringly. 'I'll make it all
right; don't trouble yourself.'

The nervous shock had made her powerless; they carried her in a
chair back to 'Runnymede,' and upstairs to her bedroom. Scarcely was
this done when Mr. and Mrs. Mumford, after a leisurely walk from the
station, approached their garden gate. The sight of a little crowd
of people in the quiet road, the smell of burning, loud voices of
excited servants, caused them to run forward in alarm. Emmeline,
frenzied by the certainty that her own house was on fire, began to
cry aloud for her child, and Mumford rushed like a madman through
the garden.

'It's all right,' said a man who stood in the doorway. 'You Mr.
Mumford? It's all right. There's been a fire, but we've got it out.'

Emmeline learnt at the same moment that her child had suffered no
harm, but she would not pause until she saw the little one and held
him in her embrace. Meanwhile, Cobb and Mumford talked in the
devastated drawing-room, which was illumined with candles.

'It's a bad job, Mr. Mumford. My name is Cobb: I daresay you've
heard of me. I came to see Miss Derrick, and I was clumsy enough to
knock the lamp over.'

'Knock the lamp over! How could you do that? Were you drunk?'

'No, but you may well ask the question. I stumbled over something--a
little chair, I think--and fell against the table with the lamp on
it.'

'Where's Miss Derrick?'

'Upstairs. She got rather badly burnt, I'm afraid. We've sent for a
doctor.'

'And here I am,' spoke a voice behind them. 'Sorry to see this, Mr.
Mumford.'

The two went upstairs together, and on the first landing encountered
Emmeline, sobbing and wailing hysterically with the child in her
arms. Her husband spoke soothingly.

'Don't, don't, Emmy. Here's Dr. Billings come to see Miss Derrick.
She's the only one that has been hurt. Go down, there's a good girl,
and send somebody to help in Miss Derrick's room; you can't be any
use yourself just now.'

'But how did it happen? Oh, _how_ did it happen?'

'I'll come and tell you all about it. Better put the boy to bed
again, hadn't you?'

When she had recovered her senses Emmeline took this advice, and,
leaving the nurse by the child's cot, went down to survey the ruin
of her property. It was a sorry sight. Where she had left a
reception-room such as any suburban lady in moderate circumstances
might be proud of; she now beheld a mere mass of unrecognisable
furniture, heaped on what had once been a carpet, amid dripping
walls and under a grimed ceiling.

'Oh! Oh!' She all but sank before the horror of the spectacle. Then,
in a voice of fierce conviction, 'She did it! _She_ did it! It was
because I told her to leave. I _know_ she did it on purpose!'

Mumford closed the door of the room, shutting out Cobb and the cook
and the housemaid. He repeated the story Cobb had told him, and
quietly urged the improbability of his wife's explanation. Miss
Derrick, he pointed out, was lying prostrate from severe burns; the
fire must have been accidental, but the accident, to be sure, was
extraordinary enough. Thereupon Mrs. Mumford's wrath turned against
Cobb. What business had such a man--a low-class savage--in _her_
drawing-room? He must have come knowing that she and her husband
were away for the evening.

'You can question him, if you like,' said Mumford. 'He's out there.'

Emmeline opened the door, and at once heard a cry of pain from
upstairs. Mumford, also hearing it, and seeing Cobb's
misery-stricken face by the light of the hall lamp, whispered to his
wife:

'Hadn't you better go up, dear? Dr. Billings may think it strange.'

It was much wiser to urge this consideration than to make a direct
plea for mercy. Emmeline did not care to have it reported that
selfish distress made her indifferent to the sufferings of a friend
staying in her house. But she could not pass Cobb without addressing
him severely.

'So _you_ are the cause of this!'

'I am, Mrs. Mumford, and I can only say that I'll do my best to make
good the damage to your house.'

'Make good I fancy you have strange ideas of the value of the
property destroyed.'

Insolence was no characteristic of Mrs. Mumford. But calamity had
put her beside herself; she spoke, not in her own person, but as a
woman whose carpets, curtains and bric-a-brac have
ignominiously perished.

'I'll make it good,' Cobb repeated humbly, 'however long it takes
me. And don't be angry with that poor girl, Mrs. Mumford. It wasn't
her fault, not in any way. She didn't know I was coming; she hadn't
asked me to come. I'm entirely to blame.'

'You mean to say you knocked over the table by accident?'

'I did indeed. And I wish I'd been burnt myself instead of her.'

He had suffered, by the way, no inconsiderable scorching, to which
his hands would testify for many a week; but of this he was still
hardly aware. Emmeline, with a glance of uttermost scorn, left him,
and ascended to the room where the doctor was busy. Free to behave
as he thought fit, Mumford beckoned Cobb to follow him into the
front garden, where they conversed with masculine calm.

'I shall put up at Sutton for the night,' said Cobb, 'and perhaps
you'll let me call the first thing in the morning to ask how she
gets on.'

'Of course. We'll see the doctor when he comes down. But I wish I
could understand how you managed to throw the lamp down.'

'The truth is,' Cobb replied, 'we were quarrelling. I'd heard
something about her that made me wild, and I came and behaved like a
fool. I feel just now as if I could go and cut my throat, that's the
fact. If anything happens to her, I believe I shall. I might as
well, in any case; she'll never look at me again.'

'Oh, don't take such a dark view of it.'

The doctor came out, on his way to fetch certain requirements, and
the two men walked with him to his house in the next road. They
learned that Louise was not dangerously injured; her recovery would
be merely a matter of time and care. Cobb gave a description of the
fire, and his hearers marvelled that the results were no worse.

'You must have some burns too?' said the doctor, whose curiosity was
piqued by everything he saw and heard of the strange occurrence. 'I
thought so; those hands must be attended to.'

Meanwhile, Emmeline sat by the bedside and listened to the
hysterical lamentation in which Louise gave her own--the
true--account of the catastrophe. It was all her fault, and upon her
let all the blame fall. She would humble herself to Mr. Higgins and
get him to pay for the furniture destroyed. If Mrs. Mumford would
but forgive her! And so on, as her poor body agonised, and the blood
grew feverish in her veins.




CHAPTER IX


'Accept it? Certainly. Why should we bear the loss if he's able to
make it good? He seems to be very well off for an unmarried man.'

'Yes,' replied Mumford, 'but he's just going to marry, and it
seems--Well, after all, you know, he didn't really cause the
damage. I should have felt much less scruple if Higgins had offered
to pay--'

'He _did_ cause the damage,' asseverated Emmeline. 'It was his gross
or violent behaviour. If we had been insured it wouldn't matter so
much. And pray let this be a warning, and insure at once. However
you look at it, he ought to pay.'

Emmeline's temper had suffered much since she made the acquaintance
of Miss Derrick. Aforetime, she could discuss difference of opinion;
now a hint of diversity drove her at once to the female weapon--angry
and iterative assertion. Her native delicacy, also, seemed to
have degenerated. Mumford could only hold his tongue and trust that
this would be but a temporary obscurement of his wife's amiable
virtues.

Cobb had written from Bristol, a week after the accident, formally
requesting a statement of the pecuniary loss which the Mumfords had
suffered; he was resolved to repay them, and would do so, if
possible, as soon as he knew the sum. Mumford felt a trifle ashamed
to make the necessary declaration; at the outside, even with
expenses of painting and papering, their actual damage could not be
estimated at more than fifty pounds, and even Emmeline did not wish
to save appearances by making an excessive demand. The one costly
object in the room--the piano--was practically uninjured, and sundry
other pieces of furniture could easily be restored; for Cobb and his
companion, as amateur firemen, had by no means gone recklessly to
work. By candle-light, when the floor was still a swamp, things
looked more desperate than they proved to be on subsequent
investigation; and it is wonderful at how little outlay, in our
glistening times, a villa drawing-room may be fashionably equipped.
So Mumford wrote to his correspondent that only a few 'articles' had
absolutely perished; that it was not his wish to make any demand at
all; but that, if Mr. Cobb insisted on offering restitution, why, a
matter of fifty pounds, etc. etc. And in a few days this sum
arrived, in the form of a draft upon respectable bankers.

Of course the house was in grievous disorder. Upholsterers' workmen
would have been bad enough, but much worse was the establishment of
Mrs. Higgins by her daughter's bedside, which naturally involved her
presence as a guest at table, and the endurance of her conversation
whenever she chose to come downstairs. Mumford urged his wife to
take her summer holiday--to go away with the child until all was put
right again--a phrase which included the removal of Miss Derrick
to her own home; but of this Emmeline would not hear. How could she
enjoy an hour of mental quietude when, for all she knew, Mrs.
Higgins and the patient might be throwing lamps at each other? And
her jealousy was still active, though she did not allow it to betray
itself in words. Clarence seemed to her quite needlessly anxious in
his inquiries concerning Miss Derrick's condition. Until that young
lady had disappeared from 'Runnymede' for ever, Emmeline would keep
matronly watch and ward.

Mrs. Higgins declared at least a score of times every day that she
could _not_ understand how this dreadful affair had come to pass.
The most complete explanation from her daughter availed nothing; she
deemed the event an insoluble mystery, and, in familiar talk with
Mrs. Mumford, breathed singular charges against Louise's lover.
'She's shielding him, my dear. I've no doubt of it. I never had a
very good opinion of him, but now she shall never marry him with
_my_ consent.' To this kind of remark Emmeline at length deigned no
reply. She grew to detest Mrs. Higgins, and escaped her society by
every possible manoeuvre.

'Oh, how pleasant it is,' she explained bitterly to her husband, 'to
think that everybody in the road is talking about us with contempt!
Of course the servants have spread nice stories. And the
Wilkinsons'--these were the people next door--'look upon us as
hardly respectable. Even Mrs. Fentiman said yesterday that she
really could not conceive how I came to take that girl into the
house. I acknowledged that I must have been crazy.'

'Whilst we're thoroughly upset,' replied Mumford, with irritation at
this purposeless talk, 'hadn't we better leave the house and go to
live as far away as possible?'

'Indeed, I very much wish we could. I don't think I shall ever be
happy again at Sutton.'

And Clarence went off muttering to himself about the absurdity and
the selfishness of women.

For a week or ten days Louise lay very ill; then her vigorous
constitution began to assert itself. It helped her greatly towards
convalescence when she found that the scorches on her face would not
leave a permanent blemish. Mrs. Mumford came into the room once a
day and sat for a few minutes, neither of them desiring longer
communion, but they managed to exchange inquiries and remarks with a
show of friendliness.  When the fifty pounds came from Cobb, Emmeline
made no mention of it. Louise said with an air of satisfaction,

'So he has paid the money! I'm very glad of that.'

'Mr. Cobb insisted on paying,' Mrs. Mumford answered with reserve.
'We could not hurt his feelings by refusing.'

'Well, that's all right, isn't it? You won't think so badly of us
now? Of course you wish you'd never set eyes on me, Mrs. Mumford;
but that's only natural: in your place I'm sure I should feel the
same. Still, now the money's paid, you won't always think unkindly
of me, will you?'

The girl lay propped on pillows; her pale face, with its healing
scars, bore witness to what she had undergone, and one of her arms
was completely swathed in bandages. Emmeline did not soften towards
her, but the frank speech, the rather pathetic little smile, in
decency demanded a suave response.

'I shall wish you every happiness, Louise.'

'Thank you. We shall be married as soon as ever I'm well, but I'm
sure I don't know where. Mother hates his very name, and does her
best to set me against him; but I just let her talk. We're beginning
to quarrel a little--did you hear us this morning? I try to keep
down my voice, and I shan't be here much longer, you know. I shall
go home at first my stepfather has written a kind letter, and of
course he's glad to know I shall marry Mr. Cobb. But I don't think
the wedding will be there. It wouldn't be nice to go to church in a
rage, as I'm sure I should with mother and Cissy looking on.'

This might, or might not, signify a revival of the wish to be
married from 'Runnymede.' Emmeline quickly passed to another
subject.

Mrs. Higgins was paying a visit to Coburg Lodge, where, during the
days of confusion, the master of the house had been left at his
servants' mercy. On her return, late in the evening, she entered
flurried and perspiring, and asked the servant who admitted her
where Mrs. Mumford was.

'With master, in the library, 'm.'

'Tell her I wish to speak to her at once.'

Emmeline came forth, and a lamp was lighted in the dining-room, for
the drawing-room had not yet been restored to a habitable condition.
Silent, and wondering in gloomy resignation what new annoyance was
prepared for her, Emmeline sat with eyes averted, whilst the stout
woman mopped her face and talked disconnectedly of the hardships of
travelling in such weather as this; when at length she reached her
point, Mrs. Higgins became lucid and emphatic.

'I've heard things as have made me that angry I can hardly bear
myself. Would you believe that people are trying to take away my
daughter's character? It's Cissy 'Iggins's doing: I'm sure of it,
though I haven't brought it 'ome to her yet. I dropped in to see
some friends of ours--I shouldn't wonder if you know the name; it's
Mrs. Jolliffe, a niece of Mr. Baxter--Baxter, Lukin and Co., you
know. And she told me in confidence what people are saying--as how
Louise was to marry Mr. Bowling, but he broke it off when he found
_the sort of people she was living with_, here at Sutton--and a
great many more things as I shouldn't like to tell you. Now what
_do_ you think of--'

Emmeline, her eyes flashing, broke in angrily:

'I think nothing at all about it, Mrs. Higgins, and I had very much
rather not hear the talk of such people.'

'I don't wonder it aggravates you, Mrs. Mumford. Did anyone ever
hear such a scandal! I'm sure nobody that knows you could say a word
against your respectability, and, as I told Mrs. Jolliffe, she's
quite at liberty to call here to-morrow or the next day--'

'Not to see _me_, I hope,' said Emmeline. 'I must refuse--'

'Now just let me tell you what I've thought,' pursued the stout
lady, hardly aware of this interruption. 'This'll have to be set
right, both for Lou's sake and for yours, and to satisfy us all.
They're making a mystery, d'you see, of Lou leaving 'ome and going
off to live with strangers; and Cissy's been doing her best to make
people think there's something wrong--the spiteful creature! And
there's only one way of setting it right. As soon as Lou can be
dressed and got down, and when the drawing-room's finished, I want
her to ask all our friends here to five o'clock tea, just to let
them see with their own eyes--'

'Mrs. Higgins!'

'Of course there'll be no expense for _you_, Mrs. Mumford--not a
farthing. I'll provide everything, and all I ask of you is just to
sit in your own drawing-room--'

'Mrs. Higgins, be so kind as to listen to me. This is quite
impossible. I can't dream of allowing any such thing.'

The other glared in astonishment, which tended to wrath.

'But can't you see, Mrs. Mumford, that it's for your _own_ good as
well as ours? Do you want people to be using your name--'

'What can it matter to me how _such_ people think or speak of me?'
cried Emmeline, trembling with exasperation.

'Such people! I don't think you know who you're talking about, Mrs.
Mumford. You'll let me tell you that my friends are as respectable
as yours--'

'I shall not argue about it,' said Emmeline, standing up. 'You will
please to remember that already I've had a great deal of trouble and
annoyance, and what you propose would be quite intolerable. Once for
all, I can't dream of such a thing.'

'Then all I can say is, Mrs. Mumford'--the speaker rose with heavy
dignity--'that you're not behaving in a very ladylike way. I'm not a
quarrelsome person, as you well know, and I don't say nasty things
