little discussion.  The pearls were evidently of great value, and he
was averse to part with them, for, between friends, my brother was
himself a little inclined to my father's fault.  He thought, too, that
if we parted with the chaplet it might give rise to gossip and finally
bring us into trouble.  It was all that I could do to persuade him to
let me find out Miss Morstan's address and send her a detached pearl at
fixed intervals, so that at least she might never feel destitute."

"It was a kindly thought," said our companion, earnestly.  "It was
extremely good of you."

The little man waved his hand deprecatingly.  "We were your trustees,"
he said.  "That was the view which I took of it, though Brother
Bartholomew could not altogether see it in that light.  We had plenty
of money ourselves.  I desired no more. Besides, it would have been
such bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a fashion. 'Le
mauvais gout mene au crime.'  The French have a very neat way of
putting these things. Our difference of opinion on this subject went so
far that I thought it best to set up rooms for myself:  so I left
Pondicherry Lodge, taking the old khitmutgar and Williams with me.
Yesterday, however, I learn that an event of extreme importance has
occurred.  The treasure has been discovered.  I instantly communicated
with Miss Morstan, and it only remains for us to drive out to Norwood
and demand our share.  I explained my views last night to Brother
Bartholomew:  so we shall be expected, if not welcome, visitors."

Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurious settee.
We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the new development
which the mysterious business had taken.  Holmes was the first to
spring to his feet.

"You have done well, sir, from first to last," said he.  "It is
possible that we may be able to make you some small return by throwing
some light upon that which is still dark to you.  But, as Miss Morstan
remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put the matter through
without delay."

Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his
hookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befrogged
topcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs.  This he buttoned tightly up,
in spite of the extreme closeness of the night, and finished his attire
by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets which covered the
ears, so that no part of him was visible save his mobile and peaky
face.  "My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as he led the way
down the passage.  "I am compelled to be a valetudinarian."

Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidently
prearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.
Thaddeus Sholto talked incessantly, in a voice which rose high above
the rattle of the wheels.

"Bartholomew is a clever fellow," said he.  "How do you think he found
out where the treasure was?  He had come to the conclusion that it was
somewhere indoors:  so he worked out all the cubic space of the house,
and made measurements everywhere, so that not one inch should be
unaccounted for.  Among other things, he found that the height of the
building was seventy-four feet, but on adding together the heights of
all the separate rooms, and making every allowance for the space
between, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring the total
to more than seventy feet. There were four feet unaccounted for.  These
could only be at the top of the building.  He knocked a hole,
therefore, in the lath-and-plaster ceiling of the highest room, and
there, sure enough, he came upon another little garret above it, which
had been sealed up and was known to no one.  In the centre stood the
treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters.  He lowered it through the
hole, and there it lies.  He computes the value of the jewels at not
less than half a million sterling."

At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one another
open-eyed.  Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would change from
a needy governess to the richest heiress in England. Surely it was the
place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I am ashamed to
say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that my heart turned as
heavy as lead within me.  I stammered out some few halting words of
congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my head drooped, deaf to
the babble of our new acquaintance.  He was clearly a confirmed
hypochondriac, and I was dreamily conscious that he was pouring forth
interminable trains of symptoms, and imploring information as to the
composition and action of innumerable quack nostrums, some of which he
bore about in a leather case in his pocket.  I trust that he may not
remember any of the answers which I gave him that night.  Holmes
declares that he overheard me caution him against the great danger of
taking more than two drops of castor oil, while I recommended
strychnine in large doses as a sedative. However that may be, I was
certainly relieved when our cab pulled up with a jerk and the coachman
sprang down to open the door.

"This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge," said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,
as he handed her out.



Chapter V

The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge

It was nearly eleven o'clock when we reached this final stage of our
night's adventures.  We had left the damp fog of the great city behind
us, and the night was fairly fine.  A warm wind blew from the westward,
and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half a moon peeping
occasionally through the rifts.  It was clear enough to see for some
distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of the side-lamps from the
carriage to give us a better light upon our way.

Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with a
very high stone wall topped with broken glass.  A single narrow
iron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance. On this our guide
knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat.

"Who is there?" cried a gruff voice from within.

"It is I, McMurdo.  You surely know my knock by this time."

There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. The
door swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in the
opening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon his
protruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes.

"That you, Mr. Thaddeus?  But who are the others?  I had no orders
about them from the master."

"No, McMurdo?  You surprise me!  I told my brother last night that I
should bring some friends."

"He ain't been out o' his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have no
orders.  You know very well that I must stick to regulations. I can let
you in, but your friends must just stop where they are."

This was an unexpected obstacle.  Thaddeus Sholto looked about him in a
perplexed and helpless manner.  "This is too bad of you, McMurdo!" he
said.  "If I guarantee them, that is enough for you. There is the young
lady, too.  She cannot wait on the public road at this hour."

"Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably.  "Folk may be
friends o' yours, and yet no friends o' the master's.  He pays me well
to do my duty, and my duty I'll do.  I don't know none o' your friends."

"Oh, yes you do, McMurdo," cried Sherlock Holmes, genially.  "I don't
think you can have forgotten me.  Don't you remember the amateur who
fought three rounds with you at Alison's rooms on the night of your
benefit four years back?"

"Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" roared the prize-fighter.  "God's truth! how
could I have mistook you?  If instead o' standin' there so quiet you
had just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of yours under the jaw,
I'd ha' known you without a question. Ah, you're one that has wasted
your gifts, you have!  You might have aimed high, if you had joined the
fancy."

"You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of the
scientific professions open to me," said Holmes, laughing.  "Our friend
won't keep us out in the cold now, I am sure."

"In you come, sir, in you come,--you and your friends," he answered.
"Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict. Had to be
certain of your friends before I let them in."

Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clump of
a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where a
moonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window.  The vast
size of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence, struck a
chill to the heart.  Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at ease, and the
lantern quivered and rattled in his hand.

"I cannot understand it," he said.  "There must be some mistake. I
distinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there is no
light in his window.  I do not know what to make of it."

"Does he always guard the premises in this way?" asked Holmes.

"Yes; he has followed my father's custom.  He was the favorite son, you
know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him more than
he ever told me.  That is Bartholomew's window up there where the
moonshine strikes.  It is quite bright, but there is no light from
within, I think."

"None," said Holmes.  "But I see the glint of a light in that little
window beside the door."

"Ah, that is the housekeeper's room.  That is where old Mrs. Bernstone
sits.  She can tell us all about it.  But perhaps you would not mind
waiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in together and she
has no word of our coming she may be alarmed. But hush! what is that?"

He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of light
flickered and wavered all round us.  Miss Morstan seized my wrist, and
we all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears. From the great
black house there sounded through the silent night the saddest and most
pitiful of sounds,--the shrill, broken whimpering of a frightened woman.

"It is Mrs. Bernstone," said Sholto.  "She is the only woman in the
house.  Wait here.  I shall be back in a moment."  He hurried for the
door, and knocked in his peculiar way.  We could see a tall old woman
admit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.

"Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come!  I am so glad you
have come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!"  We heard her reiterated rejoicings
until the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffled
monotone.

Our guide had left us the lantern.  Holmes swung it slowly round, and
peered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-heaps which
cumbered the grounds.  Miss Morstan and I stood together, and her hand
was in mine.  A wondrous subtle thing is love, for here were we two who
had never seen each other before that day, between whom no word or even
look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in an hour of trouble
our hands instinctively sought for each other.  I have marvelled at it
since, but at the time it seemed the most natural thing that I should
go out to her so, and, as she has often told me, there was in her also
the instinct to turn to me for comfort and protection.  So we stood
hand in hand, like two children, and there was peace in our hearts for
all the dark things that surrounded us.

"What a strange place!" she said, looking round.

"It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose in it.
I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill near Ballarat,
where the prospectors had been at work."

"And from the same cause," said Holmes.  "These are the traces of the
treasure-seekers.  You must remember that they were six years looking
for it.  No wonder that the grounds look like a gravel-pit."

At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto
came running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in his eyes.

"There is something amiss with Bartholomew!" he cried.  "I am
frightened!  My nerves cannot stand it."  He was, indeed, half
blubbering with fear, and his twitching feeble face peeping out from
the great Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of a
terrified child.

"Come into the house," said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way.

"Yes, do!" pleaded Thaddeus Sholto.  "I really do not feel equal to
giving directions."

We all followed him into the housekeeper's room, which stood upon the
left-hand side of the passage.  The old woman was pacing up and down
with a scared look and restless picking fingers, but the sight of Miss
Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her.

"God bless your sweet calm face!" she cried, with an hysterical sob.
"It does me good to see you.  Oh, but I have been sorely tried this
day!"

Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few
words of kindly womanly comfort which brought the color back into the
others bloodless cheeks.

"Master has locked himself in and will not answer me," she explained.
"All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often likes to be
alone; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss, so I went up
and peeped through the key-hole.  You must go up, Mr. Thaddeus,--you
must go up and look for yourself.  I have seen Mr. Bartholomew Sholto
in joy and in sorrow for ten long years, but I never saw him with such
a face on him as that."

Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto's
teeth were chattering in his head.  So shaken was he that I had to pass
my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his knees were
trembling under him.  Twice as we ascended Holmes whipped his lens out
of his pocket and carefully examined marks which appeared to me to be
mere shapeless smudges of dust upon the cocoa-nut matting which served
as a stair-carpet. He walked slowly from step to step, holding the
lamp, and shooting keen glances to right and left.  Miss Morstan had
remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.

The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some length,
with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of it and three
doors upon the left.  Holmes advanced along it in the same slow and
methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with our long black
shadows streaming backwards down the corridor.  The third door was that
which we were seeking.  Holmes knocked without receiving any answer,
and then tried to turn the handle and force it open.  It was locked on
the inside, however, and by a broad and powerful bolt, as we could see
when we set our lamp up against it.  The key being turned, however, the
hole was not entirely closed.  Sherlock Holmes bent down to it, and
instantly rose again with a sharp intaking of the breath.

"There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more moved than
I had ever before seen him.  "What do you make of it?"

I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror.  Moonlight was streaming
into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shifty radiance.
Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in the air, for all
beneath was in shadow, there hung a face,--the very face of our
companion Thaddeus.  There was the same high, shining head, the same
circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless countenance.  The
features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a fixed and unnatural
grin, which in that still and moonlit room was more jarring to the
nerves than any scowl or contortion.  So like was the face to that of
our little friend that I looked round at him to make sure that he was
indeed with us.  Then I recalled to mind that he had mentioned to us
that his brother and he were twins.

"This is terrible!" I said to Holmes.  "What is to be done?"

"The door must come down," he answered, and, springing against it, he
put all his weight upon the lock.  It creaked and groaned, but did not
yield.  Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this time it
gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves within Bartholomew
Sholto's chamber.

It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory.  A double
line of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the wall opposite the
door, and the table was littered over with Bunsen burners, test-tubes,
and retorts.  In the corners stood carboys of acid in wicker baskets.
One of these appeared to leak or to have been broken, for a stream of
dark-colored liquid had trickled out from it, and the air was heavy
with a peculiarly pungent, tar-like odor.  A set of steps stood at one
side of the room, in the midst of a litter of lath and plaster, and
above them there was an opening in the ceiling large enough for a man
to pass through.  At the foot of the steps a long coil of rope was
thrown carelessly together.

By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house was seated
all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, and that
ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face.  He was stiff and cold, and
had clearly been dead many hours.  It seemed to me that not only his
features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the most
fantastic fashion.  By his hand upon the table there lay a peculiar
instrument,--a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head like a
hammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine.  Beside it was a torn sheet
of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it.  Holmes glanced at it,
and then handed it to me.

"You see," he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.

In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, "The sign
of the four."

"In God's name, what does it all mean?" I asked.

"It means murder," said he, stooping over the dead man.  "Ah, I
expected it.  Look here!"  He pointed to what looked like a long, dark
thorn stuck in the skin just above the ear.

"It looks like a thorn," said I.

"It is a thorn.  You may pick it out.  But be careful, for it is
poisoned."

I took it up between my finger and thumb.  It came away from the skin
so readily that hardly any mark was left behind.  One tiny speck of
blood showed where the puncture had been.

"This is all an insoluble mystery to me," said I.  "It grows darker
instead of clearer."

"On the contrary," he answered, "it clears every instant.  I only
require a few missing links to have an entirely connected case."

We had almost forgotten our companion's presence since we entered the
chamber.  He was still standing in the door-way, the very picture of
terror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself. Suddenly, however,
he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry.

"The treasure is gone!" he said.  "They have robbed him of the
treasure!  There is the hole through which we lowered it.  I helped him
to do it!  I was the last person who saw him!  I left him here last
night, and I heard him lock the door as I came down-stairs."

"What time was that?"

"It was ten o'clock.  And now he is dead, and the police will be called
in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it. Oh, yes, I am
sure I shall.  But you don't think so, gentlemen? Surely you don't
think that it was I?  Is it likely that I would have brought you here
if it were I?  Oh, dear! oh, dear!  I know that I shall go mad!"  He
jerked his arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsive frenzy.

"You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes, kindly, putting
his hand upon his shoulder.  "Take my advice, and drive down to the
station to report this matter to the police.  Offer to assist them in
every way.  We shall wait here until your return."

The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard him
stumbling down the stairs in the dark.



Chapter VI

Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration

"Now, Watson," said Holmes, rubbing his hands, "we have half an hour to
ourselves.  Let us make good use of it.  My case is, as I have told
you, almost complete; but we must not err on the side of
over-confidence.  Simple as the case seems now, there may be something
deeper underlying it."

"Simple!" I ejaculated.

"Surely," said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor
expounding to his class.  "Just sit in the corner there, that your
footprints may not complicate matters.  Now to work!  In the first
place, how did these folk come, and how did they go?  The door has not
been opened since last night.  How of the window?"  He carried the lamp
across to it, muttering his observations aloud the while, but
addressing them to himself rather than to me.  "Window is snibbed on
the inner side. Framework is solid.  No hinges at the side.  Let us
open it.  No water-pipe near.  Roof quite out of reach.  Yet a man has
mounted by the window. It rained a little last night.  Here is the
print of a foot in mould upon the sill.  And here is a circular muddy
mark, and here again upon the floor, and here again by the table. See
here, Watson!  This is really a very pretty demonstration."

I looked at the round, well-defined muddy discs.  "This is not a
footmark," said I.

"It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of a
wooden stump.  You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy boot
with the broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of the timber-toe."

"It is the wooden-legged man."

"Quite so.  But there has been some one else,--a very able and
efficient ally.  Could you scale that wall, doctor?"

I looked out of the open window.  The moon still shone brightly on that
angle of the house.  We were a good sixty feet from the ground, and,
look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as a crevice
in the brick-work.

"It is absolutely impossible," I answered.

"Without aid it is so.  But suppose you had a friend up here who
lowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securing
one end of it to this great hook in the wall.  Then, I think, if you
were an active man, You might swarm up, wooden leg and all.  You would
depart, of course, in the same fashion, and your ally would draw up the
rope, untie it from the hook, shut the window, snib it on the inside,
and get away in the way that he originally came.  As a minor point it
may be noted," he continued, fingering the rope, "that our
wooden-legged friend, though a fair climber, was not a professional
sailor.  His hands were far from horny.  My lens discloses more than
one blood-mark, especially towards the end of the rope, from which I
gather that he slipped down with such velocity that he took the skin
off his hand."

"This is all very well," said I, "but the thing becomes more
unintelligible than ever.  How about this mysterious ally?  How came he
into the room?"

"Yes, the ally!" repeated Holmes, pensively.  "There are features of
interest about this ally.  He lifts the case from the regions of the
commonplace.  I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the annals
of crime in this country,--though parallel cases suggest themselves
from India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia."

"How came he, then?"  I reiterated.  "The door is locked, the window is
inaccessible.  Was it through the chimney?"

"The grate is much too small," he answered.  "I had already considered
that possibility."

"How then?" I persisted.

"You will not apply my precept," he said, shaking his head.  "How often
have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossible
whatever remains, HOWEVER IMPROBABLE, must be the truth?  We know that
he did not come through the door, the window, or the chimney.  We also
know that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there is no
concealment possible. Whence, then, did he come?"

"He came through the hole in the roof," I cried.

"Of course he did.  He must have done so. If you will have the kindness
to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researches to the room
above,--the secret room in which the treasure was found."

He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, he swung
himself up into the garret.  Then, lying on his face, he reached down
for the lamp and held it while I followed him.

The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one way and
six the other.  The floor was formed by the rafters, with thin
lath-and-plaster between, so that in walking one had to step from beam
to beam.  The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the inner shell
of the true roof of the house.  There was no furniture of any sort, and
the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor.

"Here you are, you see," said Sherlock Holmes, putting his hand against
the sloping wall.  "This is a trap-door which leads out on to the roof.
I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping at a gentle
angle.  This, then, is the way by which Number One entered.  Let us see
if we can find any other traces of his individuality."

He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for the
second time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.
For myself, as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes.
The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked foot,--clear,
well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the size of those of an
ordinary man.

"Holmes," I said, in a whisper, "a child has done the horrid thing."

He had recovered his self-possession in an instant.  "I was staggered
for the moment," he said, "but the thing is quite natural.  My memory
failed me, or I should have been able to foretell it.  There is nothing
more to be learned here.  Let us go down."

"What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?" I asked, eagerly,
when we had regained the lower room once more.

"My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself," said he, with a touch
of impatience.  "You know my methods.  Apply them, and it will be
instructive to compare results."

"I cannot conceive anything which will cover the facts," I answered.

"It will be clear enough to you soon," he said, in an off-hand way.  "I
think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I will look."
He whipped out his lens and a tape measure, and hurried about the room
on his knees, measuring, comparing, examining, with his long thin nose
only a few inches from the planks, and his beady eyes gleaming and
deep-set like those of a bird.  So swift, silent, and furtive were his
movements, like those of a trained blood-hound picking out a scent,
that I could not but think what a terrible criminal he would have made
had he turned his energy and sagacity against the law, instead of
exerting them in its defense.  As he hunted about, he kept muttering to
himself, and finally he broke out into a loud crow of delight.

"We are certainly in luck," said he.  "We ought to have very little
trouble now.  Number One has had the misfortune to tread in the
creosote.  You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot here
at the side of this evil-smelling mess.  The carboy has been cracked,
You see, and the stuff has leaked out."

"What then?" I asked.

"Why, we have got him, that's all," said he.  "I know a dog that would
follow that scent to the world's end.  If a pack can track a trailed
herring across a shire, how far can a specially-trained hound follow so
pungent a smell as this?  It sounds like a sum in the rule of three.
The answer should give us the--But halloo! here are the accredited
representatives of the law."

Heavy steps and the clamor of loud voices were audible from below, and
the hall door shut with a loud crash.

"Before they come," said Holmes, "just put your hand here on this poor
fellow's arm, and here on his leg.  What do you feel?"

"The muscles are as hard as a board," I answered.

"Quite so.  They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceeding
the usual rigor mortis.  Coupled with this distortion of the face, this
Hippocratic smile, or 'risus sardonicus,' as the old writers called it,
what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?"

"Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid," I answered,--"some
strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus."

"That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawn
muscles of the face.  On getting into the room I at once looked for the
means by which the poison had entered the system. As you saw, I
discovered a thorn which had been driven or shot with no great force
into the scalp.  You observe that the part struck was that which would
be turned towards the hole in the ceiling if the man were erect in his
chair.  Now examine the thorn."

I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It was
long, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as though
some gummy substance had dried upon it.  The blunt end had been trimmed
and rounded off with a knife.

"Is that an English thorn?" he asked.

"No, it certainly is not."

"With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference.
But here are the regulars:  so the auxiliary forces may beat a retreat."

As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly on
the passage, and a very stout, portly man in a gray suit strode heavily
into the room.  He was red-faced, burly and plethoric, with a pair of
very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out from between swollen
and puffy pouches. He was closely followed by an inspector in uniform,
and by the still palpitating Thaddeus Sholto.

"Here's a business!" he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. "Here's a
pretty business!  But who are all these?  Why, the house seems to be as
full as a rabbit-warren!"

"I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones," said Holmes,
quietly.

"Why, of course I do!" he wheezed.  "It's Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the
theorist.  Remember you!  I'll never forget how you lectured us all on
causes and inferences and effects in the Bishopgate jewel case.  It's
true you set us on the right track; but you'll own now that it was more
by good luck than good guidance."

"It was a piece of very simple reasoning."

"Oh, come, now, come!  Never be ashamed to own up.  But what is all
this?  Bad business!  Bad business!  Stern facts here,--no room for
theories.  How lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over another
case!  I was at the station when the message arrived.  What d'you think
the man died of?"

"Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorize over," said Holmes, dryly.

"No, no.  Still, we can't deny that you hit the nail on the head
sometimes.  Dear me!  Door locked, I understand.  Jewels worth half a
million missing.  How was the window?"

"Fastened; but there are steps on the sill."

"Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do with
the matter.  That's common sense.  Man might have died in a fit; but
then the jewels are missing.  Ha!  I have a theory. These flashes come
upon me at times.--Just step outside, sergeant, and you, Mr. Sholto.
Your friend can remain.--What do you think of this, Holmes?  Sholto
was, on his own confession, with his brother last night.  The brother
died in a fit, on which Sholto walked off with the treasure.  How's
that?"

"On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the door on
the inside."

"Hum!  There's a flaw there.  Let us apply common sense to the matter.
This Thaddeus Sholto WAS with his brother; there WAS a quarrel; so much
we know.  The brother is dead and the jewels are gone.  So much also we
know.  No one saw the brother from the time Thaddeus left him.  His bed
had not been slept in.  Thaddeus is evidently in a most disturbed state
of mind.  His appearance is--well, not attractive.  You see that I am
weaving my web round Thaddeus.  The net begins to close upon him."

"You are not quite in possession of the facts yet," said Holmes. "This
splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe to be poisoned,
was in the man's scalp where you still see the mark; this card,
inscribed as you see it, was on the table; and beside it lay this
rather curious stone-headed instrument.  How does all that fit into
your theory?"

"Confirms it in every respect," said the fat detective, pompously.
"House is full of Indian curiosities.  Thaddeus brought this up, and if
this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have made murderous use
of it as any other man.  The card is some hocus-pocus,--a blind, as
like as not.  The only question is, how did he depart?  Ah, of course,
here is a hole in the roof."  With great activity, considering his
bulk, he sprang up the steps and squeezed through into the garret, and
immediately afterwards we heard his exulting voice proclaiming that he
had found the trap-door.

"He can find something," remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders.  "He
has occasional glimmerings of reason.  _Il n'y a pas des sots si
incommodes que ceux qui ont de l'esprit!_"

"You see!" said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again.
"Facts are better than mere theories, after all.  My view of the case
is confirmed.  There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, and it
is partly open."

"It was I who opened it."

"Oh, indeed!  You did notice it, then?"  He seemed a little crestfallen
at the discovery.  "Well, whoever noticed it, it shows how our
gentleman got away.  Inspector!"

"Yes, sir," from the passage.

"Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.--Mr. Sholto, it is my duty to inform
you that anything which you may say will be used against you.  I arrest
you in the queen's name as being concerned in the death of your
brother."

"There, now!  Didn't I tell you!" cried the poor little man, throwing
out his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.

"Don't trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes.  "I think
that I can engage to clear you of the charge."

"Don't promise too much, Mr. Theorist,--don't promise too much!"
snapped the detective.  "You may find it a harder matter than you
think."

"Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a free
present of the name and description of one of the two people who were
in this room last night.  His name, I have every reason to believe, is
Jonathan Small.  He is a poorly-educated man, small, active, with his
right leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon the
inner side.  His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with an iron
band round the heel.  He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned, and has
been a convict.  These few indications may be of some assistance to
you, coupled with the fact that there is a good deal of skin missing
from the palm of his hand.  The other man--"

"Ah! the other man--?" asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, but
impressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision of the
other's manner.

"Is a rather curious person," said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon his
heel.  "I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to the pair
of them.--A word with you, Watson."

He led me out to the head of the stair.  "This unexpected occurrence,"
he said, "has caused us rather to lose sight of the original purpose of
our journey."

"I have just been thinking so," I answered.  "It is not right that Miss
Morstan should remain in this stricken house."

"No.  You must escort her home.  She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester,
in Lower Camberwell:  so it is not very far.  I will wait for you here
if you will drive out again.  Or perhaps you are too tired?"

"By no means.  I don't think I could rest until I know more of this
fantastic business.  I have seen something of the rough side of life,
but I give you my word that this quick succession of strange surprises
to-night has shaken my nerve completely.  I should like, however, to
see the matter through with you, now that I have got so far."

"Your presence will be of great service to me," he answered.  "We shall
work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones to exult
over any mare's-nest which he may choose to construct.  When you have
dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go on to No. 3 Pinchin Lane, down
near the water's edge at Lambeth. The third house on the right-hand
side is a bird-stuffer's: Sherman is the name.  You will see a weasel
holding a young rabbit in the window.  Knock old Sherman up, and tell
him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once.  You will bring
Toby back in the cab with you."

"A dog, I suppose."

"Yes,--a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent.  I would
rather have Toby's help than that of the whole detective force of
London."

"I shall bring him, then," said I.  "It is one now.  I ought to be back
before three, if I can get a fresh horse."

"And I," said Holmes, "shall see what I can learn from Mrs. Bernstone,
and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me, sleeps in the
next garret.  Then I shall study the great Jones's methods and listen
to his not too delicate sarcasms. 'Wir sind gewohnt das die Menschen
verhoehnen was sie nicht verstehen.'  Goethe is always pithy."



Chapter VII

The Episode of the Barrel

The police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted Miss
Morstan back to her home.  After the angelic fashion of women, she had
borne trouble with a calm face as long as there was some one weaker
than herself to support, and I had found her bright and placid by the
side of the frightened housekeeper.  In the cab, however, she first
turned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,--so sorely had
she been tried by the adventures of the night.  She has told me since
that she thought me cold and distant upon that journey.  She little
guessed the struggle within my breast, or the effort of self-restraint
which held me back.  My sympathies and my love went out to her, even as
my hand had in the garden.  I felt that years of the conventionalities
of life could not teach me to know her sweet, brave nature as had this
one day of strange experiences.  Yet there were two thoughts which
sealed the words of affection upon my lips.  She was weak and helpless,
shaken in mind and nerve. It was to take her at a disadvantage to
obtrude love upon her at such a time.  Worse still, she was rich.  If
Holmes's researches were successful, she would be an heiress.  Was it
fair, was it honorable, that a half-pay surgeon should take such
advantage of an intimacy which chance had brought about?  Might she not
look upon me as a mere vulgar fortune-seeker?  I could not bear to risk
that such a thought should cross her mind.  This Agra treasure
intervened like an impassable barrier between us.

It was nearly two o'clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. The
servants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had been so
interested by the strange message which Miss Morstan had received that
she had sat up in the hope of her return.  She opened the door herself,
a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see how tenderly
her arm stole round the other's waist and how motherly was the voice in
which she greeted her. She was clearly no mere paid dependant, but an
honored friend.  I was introduced, and Mrs. Forrester earnestly begged
me to step in and tell her our adventures.  I explained, however, the
importance of my errand, and promised faithfully to call and report any
progress which we might make with the case.  As we drove away I stole a
glance back, and I still seem to see that little group on the step, the
two graceful, clinging figures, the half-opened door, the hall light
shining through stained glass, the barometer, and the bright
stair-rods.  It was soothing to catch even that passing glimpse of a
tranquil English home in the midst of the wild, dark business which had
absorbed us.

And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker it
grew.  I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as I
rattled on through the silent gas-lit streets.  There was the original
problem:  that at least was pretty clear now. The death of Captain
Morstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, the letter,--we
had had light upon all those events.  They had only led us, however, to
a deeper and far more tragic mystery.  The Indian treasure, the curious
plan found among Morstan's baggage, the strange scene at Major Sholto's
death, the rediscovery of the treasure immediately followed by the
murder of the discoverer, the very singular accompaniments to the
crime, the footsteps, the remarkable weapons, the words upon the card,
corresponding with those upon Captain Morstan's chart,--here was indeed
a labyrinth in which a man less singularly endowed than my
fellow-lodger might well despair of ever finding the clue.

Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in the lower
quarter of Lambeth.  I had to knock for some time at No. 3 before I
could make my impression.  At last, however, there was the glint of a
candle behind the blind, and a face looked out at the upper window.

"Go on, you drunken vagabone," said the face.  "If you kick up any more
row I'll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs upon you."

"If you'll let one out it's just what I have come for," said I.

"Go on!" yelled the voice.  "So help me gracious, I have a wiper in the
bag, an' I'll drop it on your 'ead if you don't hook it."

"But I want a dog," I cried.

"I won't be argued with!" shouted Mr. Sherman.  "Now stand clear, for
when I say 'three,' down goes the wiper."

"Mr. Sherlock Holmes--" I began, but the words had a most magical
effect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minute the
door was unbarred and open.  Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean old man,
with stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tinted glasses.

"A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome," said he.  "Step in, sir.
Keep clear of the badger; for he bites.  Ah, naughty, naughty, would
you take a nip at the gentleman?"  This to a stoat which thrust its
wicked head and red eyes between the bars of its cage.  "Don't mind
that, sir:  it's only a slow-worm.  It hain't got no fangs, so I gives
it the run o' the room, for it keeps the beetles down.  You must not
mind my bein' just a little short wi' you at first, for I'm guyed at by
the children, and there's many a one just comes down this lane to knock
me up.  What was it that Mr. Sherlock Holmes wanted, sir?"

"He wanted a dog of yours."

"Ah! that would be Toby."

"Yes, Toby was the name."

"Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here."  He moved slowly forward with
his candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered round
him.  In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that there were
glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every cranny and
corner.  Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemn fowls,
who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other as our voices
disturbed their slumbers.

Toby proved to be an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half spaniel
and half lurcher, brown-and-white in color, with a very clumsy waddling
gait.  It accepted after some hesitation a lump of sugar which the old
naturalist handed to me, and, having thus sealed an alliance, it
followed me to the cab, and made no difficulties about accompanying me.
It had just struck three on the Palace clock when I found myself back
once more at Pondicherry Lodge.  The ex-prize-fighter McMurdo had, I
found, been arrested as an accessory, and both he and Mr. Sholto had
been marched off to the station.  Two constables guarded the narrow
gate, but they allowed me to pass with the dog on my mentioning the
detective's name.

Holmes was standing on the door-step, with his hands in his pockets,
smoking his pipe.

"Ah, you have him there!" said he.  "Good dog, then!  Atheney Jones has
gone.  We have had an immense display of energy since you left.  He has
arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, the housekeeper,
and the Indian servant.  We have the place to ourselves, but for a
sergeant up-stairs.  Leave the dog here, and come up."

We tied Toby to the hall table, and reascended the stairs.  The room
was as he had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over the
central figure.  A weary-looking police-sergeant reclined in the corner.

"Lend me your bull's-eye, sergeant," said my companion.  "Now tie this
bit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me. Thank you.
Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.--Just you carry them down
with you, Watson.  I am going to do a little climbing.  And dip my
handkerchief into the creasote.  That will do.  Now come up into the
garret with me for a moment."

We clambered up through the hole.  Holmes turned his light once more
upon the footsteps in the dust.

"I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks," he said. "Do you
observe anything noteworthy about them?"

"They belong," I said, "to a child or a small woman."

"Apart from their size, though.  Is there nothing else?"

"They appear to be much as other footmarks."

"Not at all.  Look here!  This is the print of a right foot in the
dust.  Now I make one with my naked foot beside it.  What is the chief
difference?"

"Your toes are all cramped together.  The other print has each toe
distinctly divided."

"Quite so.  That is the point.  Bear that in mind.  Now, would you
kindly step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of the
wood-work?  I shall stay here, as I have this handkerchief in my hand."

I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarry
smell.

"That is where he put his foot in getting out.  If YOU can trace him, I
should think that Toby will have no difficulty.  Now run down-stairs,
loose the dog, and look out for Blondin."

By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was on the
roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawling very
slowly along the ridge.  I lost sight of him behind a stack of
chimneys, but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once more upon
the opposite side.  When I made my way round there I found him seated
at one of the corner eaves.

"That you, Watson?" he cried.

"Yes."

"This is the place.  What is that black thing down there?"

"A water-barrel."

"Top on it?"

"Yes."

"No sign of a ladder?"

"No."

"Confound the fellow!  It's a most break-neck place.  I ought to be
able to come down where he could climb up.  The water-pipe feels pretty
firm.  Here goes, anyhow."

There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadily
down the side of the wall.  Then with a light spring he came on to the
barrel, and from there to the earth.

"It was easy to follow him," he said, drawing on his stockings and
boots.  "Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry he
had dropped this.  It confirms my diagnosis, as you doctors express it."

The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven out
of colored grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it.  In
shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case. Inside were half a
dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at the other,
like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto.

"They are hellish things," said he.  "Look out that you don't prick
yourself.  I'm delighted to have them, for the chances are that they
are all he has.  There is the less fear of you or me finding one in our
skin before long.  I would sooner face a Martini bullet, myself.  Are
you game for a six-mile trudge, Watson?"

"Certainly," I answered.

"Your leg will stand it?"

"Oh, yes."

"Here you are, doggy!  Good old Toby!  Smell it, Toby, smell it!" He
pushed the creasote handkerchief under the dog's nose, while the
creature stood with its fluffy legs separated, and with a most comical
cock to its head, like a connoisseur sniffing the bouquet of a famous
vintage.  Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance, fastened a
stout cord to the mongrel's collar, and led him to the foot of the
water-barrel.  The creature instantly broke into a succession of high,
tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on the ground, and his tail in the
air, pattered off upon the trail at a pace which strained his leash and
kept us at the top of our speed.

The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see some
distance in the cold gray light.  The square, massive house, with its
black, empty windows and high, bare walls, towered up, sad and forlorn,
behind us.  Our course led right across the grounds, in and out among
the trenches and pits with which they were scarred and intersected.
The whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps and ill-grown shrubs,
had a blighted, ill-omened look which harmonized with the black tragedy
which hung over it.

On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly,
underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by a
young beech.  Where the two walls joined, several bricks had been
loosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon the
lower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder.
Holmes clambered up, and, taking the dog from me, he dropped it over
upon the other side.

"There's the print of wooden-leg's hand," he remarked, as I mounted up
beside him.  "You see the slight smudge of blood upon the white
plaster.  What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy rain
since yesterday!  The scent will lie upon the road in spite of their
eight-and-twenty hours' start."

I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the great
