the prisoners be conducted to the jail-yard.  The King was overjoyed--it
would be a blessed thing to see the blue sky and breathe the fresh air
once more.  He fretted and chafed at the slowness of the officers, but
his turn came at last, and he was released from his staple and ordered
to follow the other prisoners with Hendon.

The court or quadrangle was stone-paved, and open to the sky.  The
prisoners entered it through a massive archway of masonry, and were
placed in file, standing, with their backs against the wall. A rope
was stretched in front of them, and they were also guarded by their
officers. It was a chill and lowering morning, and a light snow which
had fallen during the night whitened the great empty space and added
to the general dismalness of its aspect. Now and then a wintry wind
shivered through the place and sent the snow eddying hither and thither.

In the centre of the court stood two women, chained to posts.  A glance
showed the King that these were his good friends.  He shuddered, and
said to himself, "Alack, they are not gone free, as I had thought.  To
think that such as these should know the lash!--in England!  Ay, there's
the shame of it--not in Heathennesse, Christian England!  They will be
scourged; and I, whom they have comforted and kindly entreated, must
look on and see the great wrong done; it is strange, so strange, that
I, the very source of power in this broad realm, am helpless to protect
them. But let these miscreants look well to themselves, for there is a
day coming when I will require of them a heavy reckoning for this work.
 For every blow they strike now, they shall feel a hundred then."

A great gate swung open, and a crowd of citizens poured in.  They
flocked around the two women, and hid them from the King's view. A
clergyman entered and passed through the crowd, and he also was hidden.
 The King now heard talking, back and forth, as if questions were being
asked and answered, but he could not make out what was said.  Next there
was a deal of bustle and preparation, and much passing and repassing of
officials through that part of the crowd that stood on the further side
of the women; and whilst this proceeded a deep hush gradually fell upon
the people.

Now, by command, the masses parted and fell aside, and the King saw a
spectacle that froze the marrow in his bones.  Faggots had been piled
about the two women, and a kneeling man was lighting them!

The women bowed their heads, and covered their faces with their hands;
the yellow flames began to climb upward among the snapping and crackling
faggots, and wreaths of blue smoke to stream away on the wind; the
clergyman lifted his hands and began a prayer--just then two young girls
came flying through the great gate, uttering piercing screams, and threw
themselves upon the women at the stake.  Instantly they were torn away
by the officers, and one of them was kept in a tight grip, but the other
broke loose, saying she would die with her mother; and before she could
be stopped she had flung her arms about her mother's neck again.  She
was torn away once more, and with her gown on fire.  Two or three men
held her, and the burning portion of her gown was snatched off and
thrown flaming aside, she struggling all the while to free herself, and
saying she would be alone in the world, now; and begging to be allowed
to die with her mother.  Both the girls screamed continually, and fought
for freedom; but suddenly this tumult was drowned under a volley of
heart-piercing shrieks of mortal agony--the King glanced from the
frantic girls to the stake, then turned away and leaned his ashen face
against the wall, and looked no more.  He said, "That which I have seen,
in that one little moment, will never go out from my memory, but will
abide there; and I shall see it all the days, and dream of it all the
nights, till I die.  Would God I had been blind!"

Hendon was watching the King.  He said to himself, with satisfaction,
"His disorder mendeth; he hath changed, and groweth gentler.  If he had
followed his wont, he would have stormed at these varlets, and said he
was King, and commanded that the women be turned loose unscathed.  Soon
his delusion will pass away and be forgotten, and his poor mind will be
whole again.  God speed the day!"

That same day several prisoners were brought in to remain over night,
who were being conveyed, under guard, to various places in the kingdom,
to undergo punishment for crimes committed.  The King conversed with
these--he had made it a point, from the beginning, to instruct himself
for the kingly office by questioning prisoners whenever the opportunity
offered--and the tale of their woes wrung his heart.  One of them was
a poor half-witted woman who had stolen a yard or two of cloth from a
weaver--she was to be hanged for it.  Another was a man who had been
accused of stealing a horse; he said the proof had failed, and he had
imagined that he was safe from the halter; but no--he was hardly free
before he was arraigned for killing a deer in the King's park; this was
proved against him, and now he was on his way to the gallows.  There was
a tradesman's apprentice whose case particularly distressed the King;
this youth said he found a hawk, one evening, that had escaped from its
owner, and he took it home with him, imagining himself entitled to it;
but the court convicted him of stealing it, and sentenced him to death.

The King was furious over these inhumanities, and wanted Hendon to break
jail and fly with him to Westminster, so that he could mount his throne
and hold out his sceptre in mercy over these unfortunate people and
save their lives.  "Poor child," sighed Hendon, "these woeful tales
have brought his malady upon him again; alack, but for this evil hap, he
would have been well in a little time."

Among these prisoners was an old lawyer--a man with a strong face and a
dauntless mien.  Three years past, he had written a pamphlet against the
Lord Chancellor, accusing him of injustice, and had been punished for
it by the loss of his ears in the pillory, and degradation from the
bar, and in addition had been fined 3,000 pounds and sentenced to
imprisonment for life.  Lately he had repeated his offence; and in
consequence was now under sentence to lose _what remained of his ears_,
pay a fine of 5,000 pounds, be branded on both cheeks, and remain in
prison for life.

"These be honourable scars," he said, and turned back his grey hair and
showed the mutilated stubs of what had once been his ears.

The King's eye burned with passion.  He said--

"None believe in me--neither wilt thou.  But no matter--within the
compass of a month thou shalt be free; and more, the laws that have
dishonoured thee, and shamed the English name, shall be swept from the
statute books.  The world is made wrong; kings should go to school to
their own laws, at times, and so learn mercy." {1}




CHAPTER XXVIII. The sacrifice.

Meantime Miles was growing sufficiently tired of confinement and
inaction.  But now his trial came on, to his great gratification, and
he thought he could welcome any sentence provided a further imprisonment
should not be a part of it.  But he was mistaken about that.  He was in
a fine fury when he found himself described as a 'sturdy vagabond' and
sentenced to sit two hours in the stocks for bearing that character
and for assaulting the master of Hendon Hall.  His pretensions as to
brothership with his prosecutor, and rightful heirship to the Hendon
honours and estates, were left contemptuously unnoticed, as being not
even worth examination.

He raged and threatened on his way to punishment, but it did no good; he
was snatched roughly along by the officers, and got an occasional cuff,
besides, for his irreverent conduct.

The King could not pierce through the rabble that swarmed behind; so
he was obliged to follow in the rear, remote from his good friend and
servant.  The King had been nearly condemned to the stocks himself for
being in such bad company, but had been let off with a lecture and a
warning, in consideration of his youth.  When the crowd at last halted,
he flitted feverishly from point to point around its outer rim, hunting
a place to get through; and at last, after a deal of difficulty and
delay, succeeded.  There sat his poor henchman in the degrading stocks,
the sport and butt of a dirty mob--he, the body servant of the King
of England!  Edward had heard the sentence pronounced, but he had not
realised the half that it meant.  His anger began to rise as the sense
of this new indignity which had been put upon him sank home; it jumped
to summer heat, the next moment, when he saw an egg sail through the air
and crush itself against Hendon's cheek, and heard the crowd roar
its enjoyment of the episode.  He sprang across the open circle and
confronted the officer in charge, crying--

"For shame!  This is my servant--set him free!  I am the--"

"Oh, peace!" exclaimed Hendon, in a panic, "thou'lt destroy thyself.
Mind him not, officer, he is mad."

"Give thyself no trouble as to the matter of minding him, good man, I
have small mind to mind him; but as to teaching him somewhat, to that
I am well inclined."  He turned to a subordinate and said, "Give the
little fool a taste or two of the lash, to mend his manners."

"Half a dozen will better serve his turn," suggested Sir Hugh, who had
ridden up, a moment before, to take a passing glance at the proceedings.

The King was seized.  He did not even struggle, so paralysed was he
with the mere thought of the monstrous outrage that was proposed to be
inflicted upon his sacred person.  History was already defiled with
the record of the scourging of an English king with whips--it was an
intolerable reflection that he must furnish a duplicate of that shameful
page.  He was in the toils, there was no help for him; he must either
take this punishment or beg for its remission.  Hard conditions; he
would take the stripes--a king might do that, but a king could not beg.

But meantime, Miles Hendon was resolving the difficulty.  "Let the child
go," said he; "ye heartless dogs, do ye not see how young and frail he
is?  Let him go--I will take his lashes."

"Marry, a good thought--and thanks for it," said Sir Hugh, his face
lighting with a sardonic satisfaction.  "Let the little beggar go, and
give this fellow a dozen in his place--an honest dozen, well laid on."
The King was in the act of entering a fierce protest, but Sir Hugh
silenced him with the potent remark, "Yes, speak up, do, and free thy
mind--only, mark ye, that for each word you utter he shall get six
strokes the more."

Hendon was removed from the stocks, and his back laid bare; and whilst
the lash was applied the poor little King turned away his face and
allowed unroyal tears to channel his cheeks unchecked. "Ah, brave good
heart," he said to himself, "this loyal deed shall never perish out of
my memory.  I will not forget it--and neither shall _they_!" he added,
with passion.  Whilst he mused, his appreciation of Hendon's magnanimous
conduct grew to greater and still greater dimensions in his mind, and
so also did his gratefulness for it.  Presently he said to himself, "Who
saves his prince from wounds and possible death--and this he did for
me--performs high service; but it is little--it is nothing--oh, less
than nothing!--when 'tis weighed against the act of him who saves his
prince from _shame_!"

Hendon made no outcry under the scourge, but bore the heavy blows with
soldierly fortitude.  This, together with his redeeming the boy by
taking his stripes for him, compelled the respect of even that forlorn
and degraded mob that was gathered there; and its gibes and hootings
died away, and no sound remained but the sound of the falling blows.
 The stillness that pervaded the place, when Hendon found himself once
more in the stocks, was in strong contrast with the insulting clamour
which had prevailed there so little a while before.  The King came
softly to Hendon's side, and whispered in his ear--

"Kings cannot ennoble thee, thou good, great soul, for One who is higher
than kings hath done that for thee; but a king can confirm thy nobility
to men."  He picked up the scourge from the ground, touched Hendon's
bleeding shoulders lightly with it, and whispered, "Edward of England
dubs thee Earl!"

Hendon was touched.  The water welled to his eyes, yet at the same time
the grisly humour of the situation and circumstances so undermined his
gravity that it was all he could do to keep some sign of his inward
mirth from showing outside.  To be suddenly hoisted, naked and gory,
from the common stocks to the Alpine altitude and splendour of
an Earldom, seemed to him the last possibility in the line of the
grotesque.  He said to himself, "Now am I finely tinselled, indeed!
 The spectre-knight of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows is become a
spectre-earl--a dizzy flight for a callow wing!  An' this go on, I
shall presently be hung like a very maypole with fantastic gauds and
make-believe honours.  But I shall value them, all valueless as
they are, for the love that doth bestow them. Better these poor mock
dignities of mine, that come unasked, from a clean hand and a right
spirit, than real ones bought by servility from grudging and interested
power."

The dreaded Sir Hugh wheeled his horse about, and as he spurred away,
the living wall divided silently to let him pass, and as silently closed
together again.  And so remained; nobody went so far as to venture
a remark in favour of the prisoner, or in compliment to him; but no
matter--the absence of abuse was a sufficient homage in itself.  A
late comer who was not posted as to the present circumstances, and who
delivered a sneer at the 'impostor,' and was in the act of following it
with a dead cat, was promptly knocked down and kicked out, without any
words, and then the deep quiet resumed sway once more.




CHAPTER XXIX. To London.

When Hendon's term of service in the stocks was finished, he was
released and ordered to quit the region and come back no more. His sword
was restored to him, and also his mule and his donkey. He mounted
and rode off, followed by the King, the crowd opening with quiet
respectfulness to let them pass, and then dispersing when they were
gone.

Hendon was soon absorbed in thought.  There were questions of high
import to be answered.  What should he do?  Whither should he go?
Powerful help must be found somewhere, or he must relinquish his
inheritance and remain under the imputation of being an impostor
besides.  Where could he hope to find this powerful help?  Where,
indeed!  It was a knotty question. By-and-by a thought occurred to him
which pointed to a possibility--the slenderest of slender possibilities,
certainly, but still worth considering, for lack of any other that
promised anything at all.  He remembered what old Andrews had said about
the young King's goodness and his generous championship of the wronged
and unfortunate.  Why not go and try to get speech of him and beg for
justice?  Ah, yes, but could so fantastic a pauper get admission to the
august presence of a monarch? Never mind--let that matter take care of
itself; it was a bridge that would not need to be crossed till he should
come to it.  He was an old campaigner, and used to inventing shifts and
expedients:  no doubt he would be able to find a way.  Yes, he would
strike for the capital. Maybe his father's old friend Sir Humphrey
Marlow would help him--'good old Sir Humphrey, Head Lieutenant of the
late King's kitchen, or stables, or something'--Miles could not remember
just what or which.  Now that he had something to turn his energies to,
a distinctly defined object to accomplish, the fog of humiliation and
depression which had settled down upon his spirits lifted and blew away,
and he raised his head and looked about him.  He was surprised to see
how far he had come; the village was away behind him.  The King was
jogging along in his wake, with his head bowed; for he, too, was deep
in plans and thinkings.  A sorrowful misgiving clouded Hendon's new-born
cheerfulness:  would the boy be willing to go again to a city where,
during all his brief life, he had never known anything but ill-usage and
pinching want?  But the question must be asked; it could not be avoided;
so Hendon reined up, and called out--

"I had forgotten to inquire whither we are bound.  Thy commands, my
liege!"

"To London!"

Hendon moved on again, mightily contented with the answer--but astounded
at it too.

The whole journey was made without an adventure of importance. But it
ended with one.  About ten o'clock on the night of the 19th of February
they stepped upon London Bridge, in the midst of a writhing, struggling
jam of howling and hurrahing people, whose beer-jolly faces stood out
strongly in the glare from manifold torches--and at that instant the
decaying head of some former duke or other grandee tumbled down between
them, striking Hendon on the elbow and then bounding off among the
hurrying confusion of feet. So evanescent and unstable are men's works
in this world!--the late good King is but three weeks dead and three
days in his grave, and already the adornments which he took such pains
to select from prominent people for his noble bridge are falling.  A
citizen stumbled over that head, and drove his own head into the back of
somebody in front of him, who turned and knocked down the first person
that came handy, and was promptly laid out himself by that person's
friend.  It was the right ripe time for a free fight, for the
festivities of the morrow--Coronation Day--were already beginning;
everybody was full of strong drink and patriotism; within five minutes
the free fight was occupying a good deal of ground; within ten or twelve
it covered an acre of so, and was become a riot.  By this time Hendon
and the King were hopelessly separated from each other and lost in the
rush and turmoil of the roaring masses of humanity.  And so we leave
them.




CHAPTER XXX. Tom's progress.

Whilst the true King wandered about the land poorly clad, poorly
fed, cuffed and derided by tramps one while, herding with thieves
and murderers in a jail another, and called idiot and impostor by
all impartially, the mock King Tom Canty enjoyed quite a different
experience.

When we saw him last, royalty was just beginning to have a bright side
for him.  This bright side went on brightening more and more every
day: in a very little while it was become almost all sunshine and
delightfulness.  He lost his fears; his misgivings faded out and died;
his embarrassments departed, and gave place to an easy and confident
bearing.  He worked the whipping-boy mine to ever-increasing profit.

He ordered my Lady Elizabeth and my Lady Jane Grey into his presence
when he wanted to play or talk, and dismissed them when he was done with
them, with the air of one familiarly accustomed to such performances.
 It no longer confused him to have these lofty personages kiss his hand
at parting.

He came to enjoy being conducted to bed in state at night, and dressed
with intricate and solemn ceremony in the morning.  It came to be a
proud pleasure to march to dinner attended by a glittering procession
of officers of state and gentlemen-at-arms; insomuch, indeed, that he
doubled his guard of gentlemen-at-arms, and made them a hundred.  He
liked to hear the bugles sounding down the long corridors, and the
distant voices responding, "Way for the King!"

He even learned to enjoy sitting in throned state in council, and
seeming to be something more than the Lord Protector's mouthpiece. He
liked to receive great ambassadors and their gorgeous trains, and listen
to the affectionate messages they brought from illustrious monarchs who
called him brother.  O happy Tom Canty, late of Offal Court!

He enjoyed his splendid clothes, and ordered more:  he found his four
hundred servants too few for his proper grandeur, and trebled them.  The
adulation of salaaming courtiers came to be sweet music to his ears.  He
remained kind and gentle, and a sturdy and determined champion of all
that were oppressed, and he made tireless war upon unjust laws:  yet
upon occasion, being offended, he could turn upon an earl, or even a
duke, and give him a look that would make him tremble.  Once, when his
royal 'sister,' the grimly holy Lady Mary, set herself to reason with
him against the wisdom of his course in pardoning so many people who
would otherwise be jailed, or hanged, or burned, and reminded him that
their august late father's prisons had sometimes contained as high as
sixty thousand convicts at one time, and that during his admirable reign
he had delivered seventy-two thousand thieves and robbers over to death
by the executioner, {9} the boy was filled with generous indignation,
and commanded her to go to her closet, and beseech God to take away the
stone that was in her breast, and give her a human heart.

Did Tom Canty never feel troubled about the poor little rightful prince
who had treated him so kindly, and flown out with such hot zeal to
avenge him upon the insolent sentinel at the palace-gate? Yes; his first
royal days and nights were pretty well sprinkled with painful thoughts
about the lost prince, and with sincere longings for his return, and
happy restoration to his native rights and splendours.  But as time
wore on, and the prince did not come, Tom's mind became more and more
occupied with his new and enchanting experiences, and by little and
little the vanished monarch faded almost out of his thoughts; and
finally, when he did intrude upon them at intervals, he was become an
unwelcome spectre, for he made Tom feel guilty and ashamed.

Tom's poor mother and sisters travelled the same road out of his mind.
At first he pined for them, sorrowed for them, longed to see them, but
later, the thought of their coming some day in their rags and dirt, and
betraying him with their kisses, and pulling him down from his lofty
place, and dragging him back to penury and degradation and the slums,
made him shudder.  At last they ceased to trouble his thoughts almost
wholly.  And he was content, even glad:  for, whenever their mournful
and accusing faces did rise before him now, they made him feel more
despicable than the worms that crawl.

At midnight of the 19th of February, Tom Canty was sinking to sleep in
his rich bed in the palace, guarded by his loyal vassals, and surrounded
by the pomps of royalty, a happy boy; for tomorrow was the day appointed
for his solemn crowning as King of England. At that same hour, Edward,
the true king, hungry and thirsty, soiled and draggled, worn with
travel, and clothed in rags and shreds--his share of the results of the
riot--was wedged in among a crowd of people who were watching with deep
interest certain hurrying gangs of workmen who streamed in and out of
Westminster Abbey, busy as ants:  they were making the last preparation
for the royal coronation.




CHAPTER XXXI. The Recognition procession.

When Tom Canty awoke the next morning, the air was heavy with a
thunderous murmur:  all the distances were charged with it.  It was
music to him; for it meant that the English world was out in its
strength to give loyal welcome to the great day.

Presently Tom found himself once more the chief figure in a wonderful
floating pageant on the Thames; for by ancient custom the 'recognition
procession' through London must start from the Tower, and he was bound
thither.

When he arrived there, the sides of the venerable fortress seemed
suddenly rent in a thousand places, and from every rent leaped a
red tongue of flame and a white gush of smoke; a deafening explosion
followed, which drowned the shoutings of the multitude, and made the
ground tremble; the flame-jets, the smoke, and the explosions, were
repeated over and over again with marvellous celerity, so that in a few
moments the old Tower disappeared in the vast fog of its own smoke, all
but the very top of the tall pile called the White Tower; this, with
its banners, stood out above the dense bank of vapour as a mountain-peak
projects above a cloud-rack.

Tom Canty, splendidly arrayed, mounted a prancing war-steed, whose rich
trappings almost reached to the ground; his 'uncle,' the Lord Protector
Somerset, similarly mounted, took place in his rear; the King's Guard
formed in single ranks on either side, clad in burnished armour;
after the Protector followed a seemingly interminable procession of
resplendent nobles attended by their vassals; after these came the lord
mayor and the aldermanic body, in crimson velvet robes, and with their
gold chains across their breasts; and after these the officers and
members of all the guilds of London, in rich raiment, and bearing the
showy banners of the several corporations.  Also in the procession, as a
special guard of honour through the city, was the Ancient and Honourable
Artillery Company--an organisation already three hundred years old
at that time, and the only military body in England possessing the
privilege (which it still possesses in our day) of holding itself
independent of the commands of Parliament.  It was a brilliant
spectacle, and was hailed with acclamations all along the line, as it
took its stately way through the packed multitudes of citizens. The
chronicler says, 'The King, as he entered the city, was received by the
people with prayers, welcomings, cries, and tender words, and all signs
which argue an earnest love of subjects toward their sovereign; and the
King, by holding up his glad countenance to such as stood afar off, and
most tender language to those that stood nigh his Grace, showed himself
no less thankful to receive the people's goodwill than they to offer it.
 To all that wished him well, he gave thanks.  To such as bade "God save
his Grace," he said in return, "God save you all!" and added that "he
thanked them with all his heart." Wonderfully transported were the
people with the loving answers and gestures of their King.'

In Fenchurch Street a 'fair child, in costly apparel,' stood on a stage
to welcome his Majesty to the city.  The last verse of his greeting was
in these words--

'Welcome, O King! as much as hearts can think; Welcome, again, as much
as tongue can tell,--Welcome to joyous tongues, and hearts that will
not shrink: God thee preserve, we pray, and wish thee ever well.'

The people burst forth in a glad shout, repeating with one voice what
the child had said.  Tom Canty gazed abroad over the surging sea of
eager faces, and his heart swelled with exultation; and he felt that
the one thing worth living for in this world was to be a king, and a
nation's idol.  Presently he caught sight, at a distance, of a couple
of his ragged Offal Court comrades--one of them the lord high admiral in
his late mimic court, the other the first lord of the bedchamber in the
same pretentious fiction; and his pride swelled higher than ever.  Oh,
if they could only recognise him now!  What unspeakable glory it would
be, if they could recognise him, and realise that the derided mock king
of the slums and back alleys was become a real King, with illustrious
dukes and princes for his humble menials, and the English world at his
feet!  But he had to deny himself, and choke down his desire, for such
a recognition might cost more than it would come to:  so he turned away
his head, and left the two soiled lads to go on with their shoutings and
glad adulations, unsuspicious of whom it was they were lavishing them
upon.

Every now and then rose the cry, "A largess! a largess!" and Tom
responded by scattering a handful of bright new coins abroad for the
multitude to scramble for.

The chronicler says, 'At the upper end of Gracechurch Street, before the
sign of the Eagle, the city had erected a gorgeous arch, beneath which
was a stage, which stretched from one side of the street to the other.
This was an historical pageant, representing the King's immediate
progenitors.  There sat Elizabeth of York in the midst of an immense
white rose, whose petals formed elaborate furbelows around her; by her
side was Henry VII., issuing out of a vast red rose, disposed in the
same manner:  the hands of the royal pair were locked together, and the
wedding-ring ostentatiously displayed.  From the red and white roses
proceeded a stem, which reached up to a second stage, occupied by Henry
VIII., issuing from a red and white rose, with the effigy of the new
King's mother, Jane Seymour, represented by his side.  One branch sprang
from this pair, which mounted to a third stage, where sat the effigy of
Edward VI. himself, enthroned in royal majesty; and the whole pageant
was framed with wreaths of roses, red and white.'

This quaint and gaudy spectacle so wrought upon the rejoicing people,
that their acclamations utterly smothered the small voice of the child
whose business it was to explain the thing in eulogistic rhymes.  But
Tom Canty was not sorry; for this loyal uproar was sweeter music to him
than any poetry, no matter what its quality might be.  Whithersoever Tom
turned his happy young face, the people recognised the exactness of his
effigy's likeness to himself, the flesh and blood counterpart; and new
whirlwinds of applause burst forth.

The great pageant moved on, and still on, under one triumphal arch after
another, and past a bewildering succession of spectacular and symbolical
tableaux, each of which typified and exalted some virtue, or talent, or
merit, of the little King's.  'Throughout the whole of Cheapside, from
every penthouse and window, hung banners and streamers; and the richest
carpets, stuffs, and cloth-of-gold tapestried the streets--specimens
of the great wealth of the stores within; and the splendour of this
thoroughfare was equalled in the other streets, and in some even
surpassed.'

"And all these wonders and these marvels are to welcome me--me!"
murmured Tom Canty.

The mock King's cheeks were flushed with excitement, his eyes were
flashing, his senses swam in a delirium of pleasure.  At this point,
just as he was raising his hand to fling another rich largess, he caught
sight of a pale, astounded face, which was strained forward out of
the second rank of the crowd, its intense eyes riveted upon him.  A
sickening consternation struck through him; he recognised his
mother! and up flew his hand, palm outward, before his eyes--that old
involuntary gesture, born of a forgotten episode, and perpetuated by
habit.  In an instant more she had torn her way out of the press, and
past the guards, and was at his side.  She embraced his leg, she covered
it with kisses, she cried, "O my child, my darling!" lifting toward him
a face that was transfigured with joy and love.  The same instant an
officer of the King's Guard snatched her away with a curse, and sent
her reeling back whence she came with a vigorous impulse from his
strong arm.  The words "I do not know you, woman!" were falling from Tom
Canty's lips when this piteous thing occurred; but it smote him to the
heart to see her treated so; and as she turned for a last glimpse of
him, whilst the crowd was swallowing her from his sight, she seemed so
wounded, so broken-hearted, that a shame fell upon him which consumed
his pride to ashes, and withered his stolen royalty.  His grandeurs were
stricken valueless: they seemed to fall away from him like rotten rags.

The procession moved on, and still on, through ever augmenting
splendours and ever augmenting tempests of welcome; but to Tom Canty
they were as if they had not been.  He neither saw nor heard.  Royalty
had lost its grace and sweetness; its pomps were become a reproach.
 Remorse was eating his heart out.  He said, "Would God I were free of
my captivity!"

He had unconsciously dropped back into the phraseology of the first days
of his compulsory greatness.

The shining pageant still went winding like a radiant and interminable
serpent down the crooked lanes of the quaint old city, and through the
huzzaing hosts; but still the King rode with bowed head and vacant eyes,
seeing only his mother's face and that wounded look in it.

"Largess, largess!"  The cry fell upon an unheeding ear.

"Long live Edward of England!"  It seemed as if the earth shook with the
explosion; but there was no response from the King.  He heard it only as
one hears the thunder of the surf when it is blown to the ear out of a
great distance, for it was smothered under another sound which was still
nearer, in his own breast, in his accusing conscience--a voice which
kept repeating those shameful words, "I do not know you, woman!"

The words smote upon the King's soul as the strokes of a funeral bell
smite upon the soul of a surviving friend when they remind him of secret
treacheries suffered at his hands by him that is gone.

New glories were unfolded at every turning; new wonders, new marvels,
sprang into view; the pent clamours of waiting batteries were released;
new raptures poured from the throats of the waiting multitudes:  but the
King gave no sign, and the accusing voice that went moaning through his
comfortless breast was all the sound he heard.

By-and-by the gladness in the faces of the populace changed a little,
and became touched with a something like solicitude or anxiety:  an
abatement in the volume of the applause was observable too.  The Lord
Protector was quick to notice these things:  he was as quick to detect
the cause.  He spurred to the King's side, bent low in his saddle,
uncovered, and said--

"My liege, it is an ill time for dreaming.  The people observe thy
downcast head, thy clouded mien, and they take it for an omen.  Be
advised:  unveil the sun of royalty, and let it shine upon these boding
vapours, and disperse them.  Lift up thy face, and smile upon the
people."

So saying, the Duke scattered a handful of coins to right and left, then
retired to his place.  The mock King did mechanically as he had been
bidden.  His smile had no heart in it, but few eyes were near enough
or sharp enough to detect that.  The noddings of his plumed head as he
saluted his subjects were full of grace and graciousness; the largess
which he delivered from his hand was royally liberal:  so the people's
anxiety vanished, and the acclamations burst forth again in as mighty a
volume as before.

Still once more, a little before the progress was ended, the Duke was
obliged to ride forward, and make remonstrance.  He whispered--

"O dread sovereign! shake off these fatal humours; the eyes of the world
are upon thee."  Then he added with sharp annoyance, "Perdition catch
that crazy pauper! 'twas she that hath disturbed your Highness."

The gorgeous figure turned a lustreless eye upon the Duke, and said in a
dead voice--

"She was my mother!"

"My God!" groaned the Protector as he reined his horse backward to his
post, "the omen was pregnant with prophecy.  He is gone mad again!"




CHAPTER XXXII. Coronation Day.

Let us go backward a few hours, and place ourselves in Westminster
Abbey, at four o'clock in the morning of this memorable Coronation Day.
 We are not without company; for although it is still night, we find
the torch-lighted galleries already filling up with people who are well
content to sit still and wait seven or eight hours till the time shall
come for them to see what they may not hope to see twice in their
lives--the coronation of a King.  Yes, London and Westminster have been
astir ever since the warning guns boomed at three o'clock, and already
crowds of untitled rich folk who have bought the privilege of trying
to find sitting-room in the galleries are flocking in at the entrances
reserved for their sort.

The hours drag along tediously enough.  All stir has ceased for some
time, for every gallery has long ago been packed.  We may sit, now, and
look and think at our leisure.  We have glimpses, here and there
and yonder, through the dim cathedral twilight, of portions of many
galleries and balconies, wedged full with other people, the other
portions of these galleries and balconies being cut off from sight by
intervening pillars and architectural projections.  We have in view
the whole of the great north transept--empty, and waiting for England's
privileged ones.  We see also the ample area or platform, carpeted with
rich stuffs, whereon the throne stands.  The throne occupies the centre
of the platform, and is raised above it upon an elevation of four steps.
Within the seat of the throne is enclosed a rough flat rock--the stone
of Scone--which many generations of Scottish kings sat on to be crowned,
and so it in time became holy enough to answer a like purpose for
English monarchs.  Both the throne and its footstool are covered with
cloth of gold.

Stillness reigns, the torches blink dully, the time drags heavily.
But at last the lagging daylight asserts itself, the torches are
extinguished, and a mellow radiance suffuses the great spaces. All
features of the noble building are distinct now, but soft and dreamy,
for the sun is lightly veiled with clouds.

At seven o'clock the first break in the drowsy monotony occurs; for on
the stroke of this hour the first peeress enters the transept, clothed
like Solomon for splendour, and is conducted to her appointed place
by an official clad in satins and velvets, whilst a duplicate of him
gathers up the lady's long train, follows after, and, when the lady is
seated, arranges the train across her lap for her.  He then places her
footstool according to her desire, after which he puts her coronet where
it will be convenient to her hand when the time for the simultaneous
coroneting of the nobles shall arrive.

By this time the peeresses are flowing in in a glittering stream, and
the satin-clad officials are flitting and glinting everywhere, seating
them and making them comfortable.  The scene is animated enough now.
 There is stir and life, and shifting colour everywhere.  After a time,
quiet reigns again; for the peeresses are all come and are all in their
places, a solid acre or such a matter, of human flowers, resplendent in
variegated colours, and frosted like a Milky Way with diamonds.  There
are all ages here: brown, wrinkled, white-haired dowagers who are able
to go back, and still back, down the stream of time, and recall the
crowning of Richard III. and the troublous days of that old forgotten
age; and there are handsome middle-aged dames; and lovely and gracious
young matrons; and gentle and beautiful young girls, with beaming eyes
and fresh complexions, who may possibly put on their jewelled coronets
awkwardly when the great time comes; for the matter will be new to
them, and their excitement will be a sore hindrance. Still, this may
not happen, for the hair of all these ladies has been arranged with a
special view to the swift and successful lodging of the crown in its
place when the signal comes.

We have seen that this massed array of peeresses is sown thick with
diamonds, and we also see that it is a marvellous spectacle--but now we
are about to be astonished in earnest.  About nine, the clouds suddenly
break away and a shaft of sunshine cleaves the mellow atmosphere, and
drifts slowly along the ranks of ladies; and every rank it touches
flames into a dazzling splendour of many-coloured fires, and we tingle
to our finger-tips with the electric thrill that is shot through us by
the surprise and the beauty of the spectacle!  Presently a special envoy
from some distant corner of the Orient, marching with the general body
of foreign ambassadors, crosses this bar of sunshine, and we catch our
breath, the glory that streams and flashes and palpitates about him is
so overpowering; for he is crusted from head to heel with gems, and his
slightest movement showers a dancing radiance all around him.

Let us change the tense for convenience.  The time drifted along--one
hour--two hours--two hours and a half; then the deep booming of
artillery told that the King and his grand procession had arrived at
last; so the waiting multitude rejoiced.  All knew that a further delay
must follow, for the King must be prepared and robed for the solemn
ceremony; but this delay would be pleasantly occupied by the assembling
of the peers of the realm in their stately robes.  These were conducted
ceremoniously to their seats, and their coronets placed conveniently
at hand; and meanwhile the multitude in the galleries were alive with
interest, for most of them were beholding for the first time, dukes,
earls, and barons, whose names had been historical for five hundred
years.  When all were finally seated, the spectacle from the galleries
and all coigns of vantage was complete; a gorgeous one to look upon and
to remember.

Now the robed and mitred great heads of the church, and their
attendants, filed in upon the platform and took their appointed places;
these were followed by the Lord Protector and other great officials, and
these again by a steel-clad detachment of the Guard.

There was a waiting pause; then, at a signal, a triumphant peal of music
burst forth, and Tom Canty, clothed in a long robe of cloth of gold,
appeared at a door, and stepped upon the platform.  The entire multitude
rose, and the ceremony of the Recognition ensued.

Then a noble anthem swept the Abbey with its rich waves of sound; and
thus heralded and welcomed, Tom Canty was conducted to the throne.
 The ancient ceremonies went on, with impressive solemnity, whilst the
audience gazed; and as they drew nearer and nearer to completion, Tom
Canty grew pale, and still paler, and a deep and steadily deepening woe
and despondency settled down upon his spirits and upon his remorseful
heart.

At last the final act was at hand.  The Archbishop of Canterbury lifted
up the crown of England from its cushion and held it out over the
trembling mock-King's head.  In the same instant a rainbow-radiance
flashed along the spacious transept; for with one impulse every
individual in the great concourse of nobles lifted a coronet and poised
it over his or her head--and paused in that attitude.

A deep hush pervaded the Abbey.  At this impressive moment, a startling
apparition intruded upon the scene--an apparition observed by none in
the absorbed multitude, until it suddenly appeared, moving up the great
central aisle.  It was a boy, bareheaded, ill shod, and clothed in
coarse plebeian garments that were falling to rags.  He raised his hand
with a solemnity which ill comported with his soiled and sorry aspect,
and delivered this note of warning--

"I forbid you to set the crown of England upon that forfeited head.  I
am the King!"

In an instant several indignant hands were laid upon the boy; but in
the same instant Tom Canty, in his regal vestments, made a swift step
forward, and cried out in a ringing voice--

"Loose him and forbear!  He _is_ the King!"

A sort of panic of astonishment swept the assemblage, and they partly
rose in their places and stared in a bewildered way at one another and
at the chief figures in this scene, like persons who wondered whether
they were awake and in their senses, or asleep and dreaming.  The Lord
Protector was as amazed as the rest, but quickly recovered himself, and
exclaimed in a voice of authority--

"Mind not his Majesty, his malady is upon him again--seize the
vagabond!"

He would have been obeyed, but the mock-King stamped his foot and cried
out--

"On your peril!  Touch him not, he is the King!"

The hands were withheld; a paralysis fell upon the house; no one moved,
no one spoke; indeed, no one knew how to act or what to say, in so
strange and surprising an emergency.  While all minds were struggling to
right themselves, the boy still moved steadily forward, with high port
and confident mien; he had never halted from the beginning; and while
the tangled minds still floundered helplessly, he stepped upon the
platform, and the mock-King ran with a glad face to meet him; and fell
on his knees before him and said--

"Oh, my lord the King, let poor Tom Canty be first to swear fealty to
thee, and say, 'Put on thy crown and enter into thine own again!'"

The Lord Protector's eye fell sternly upon the new-comer's face; but
straightway the sternness vanished away, and gave place to an expression
of wondering surprise.  This thing happened also to the other great
officers.  They glanced at each other, and retreated a step by a common
and unconscious impulse.  The thought in each mind was the same:  "What
a strange resemblance!"

The Lord Protector reflected a moment or two in perplexity, then he
said, with grave respectfulness--

"By your favour, sir, I desire to ask certain questions which--"

"I will answer them, my lord."

The Duke asked him many questions about the Court, the late King, the
prince, the princesses--the boy answered them correctly and without
hesitating.  He described the rooms of state in the palace, the late
King's apartments, and those of the Prince of Wales.

It was strange; it was wonderful; yes, it was unaccountable--so all said
that heard it.  The tide was beginning to turn, and Tom Canty's hopes to
run high, when the Lord Protector shook his head and said--

"It is true it is most wonderful--but it is no more than our lord the
King likewise can do."  This remark, and this reference to himself as
still the King, saddened Tom Canty, and he felt his hopes crumbling from
under him.  "These are not _proofs_," added the Protector.

The tide was turning very fast now, very fast indeed--but in the wrong
direction; it was leaving poor Tom Canty stranded on the throne,
and sweeping the other out to sea.  The Lord Protector communed with
himself--shook his head--the thought forced itself upon him, "It is
perilous to the State and to us all, to entertain so fateful a riddle as
this; it could divide the nation and undermine the throne."  He turned
and said--

"Sir Thomas, arrest this--No, hold!"  His face lighted, and he
confronted the ragged candidate with this question--

"Where lieth the Great Seal?  Answer me this truly, and the riddle is
unriddled; for only he that was Prince of Wales _can_ so answer! On so
trivial a thing hang a throne and a dynasty!"

It was a lucky thought, a happy thought.  That it was so considered by
the great officials was manifested by the silent applause that shot from
eye to eye around their circle in the form of bright approving glances.
Yes, none but the true prince could dissolve the stubborn mystery of the
vanished Great Seal--this forlorn little impostor had been taught his
lesson well, but here his teachings must fail, for his teacher himself
could not answer _that_ question--ah, very good, very good indeed;
now we shall be rid of this troublesome and perilous business in
short order! And so they nodded invisibly and smiled inwardly with
satisfaction, and looked to see this foolish lad stricken with a palsy
of guilty confusion. How surprised they were, then, to see nothing of
the sort happen--how they marvelled to hear him answer up promptly, in a
confident and untroubled voice, and say--

"There is nought in this riddle that is difficult."  Then, without so
much as a by-your-leave to anybody, he turned and gave this command,
with the easy manner of one accustomed to doing such things: "My Lord
St. John, go you to my private cabinet in the palace--for none knoweth
the place better than you--and, close down to the floor, in the left
corner remotest from the door that opens from the ante-chamber, you
shall find in the wall a brazen nail-head; press upon it and a little
jewel-closet will fly open which not even you do know of--no, nor
any soul else in all the world but me and the trusty artisan that did
contrive it for me. The first thing that falleth under your eye will be
the Great Seal--fetch it hither."

All the company wondered at this speech, and wondered still more to see
the little mendicant pick out this peer without hesitancy or apparent
fear of mistake, and call him by name with such a placidly convincing
air of having known him all his life.  The peer was almost surprised
into obeying.  He even made a movement as if to go, but quickly
recovered his tranquil attitude and confessed his blunder with a blush.
 Tom Canty turned upon him and said, sharply--

"Why dost thou hesitate?  Hast not heard the King's command?  Go!"

The Lord St. John made a deep obeisance--and it was observed that it was
a significantly cautious and non-committal one, it not being delivered
at either of the kings, but at the neutral ground about half-way between
the two--and took his leave.

Now began a movement of the gorgeous particles of that official group
which was slow, scarcely perceptible, and yet steady and persistent--a
movement such as is observed in a kaleidoscope that is turned slowly,
whereby the components of one splendid cluster fall away and join
themselves to another--a movement which, little by little, in the
present case, dissolved the glittering crowd that stood about Tom Canty
and clustered it together again in the neighbourhood of the new-comer.
 Tom Canty stood almost alone. Now ensued a brief season of deep
suspense and waiting--during which even the few faint hearts still
remaining near Tom Canty gradually scraped together courage enough to
glide, one by one, over to the majority.  So at last Tom Canty, in his
royal robes and jewels, stood wholly alone and isolated from the world,
a conspicuous figure, occupying an eloquent vacancy.

Now the Lord St. John was seen returning.  As he advanced up
the mid-aisle the interest was so intense that the low murmur of
conversation in the great assemblage died out and was succeeded by
a profound hush, a breathless stillness, through which his footfalls
pulsed with a dull and distant sound.  Every eye was fastened upon him
as he moved along.  He reached the platform, paused a moment, then moved
toward Tom Canty with a deep obeisance, and said--

"Sire, the Seal is not there!"

A mob does not melt away from the presence of a plague-patient with more
haste than the band of pallid and terrified courtiers melted away from
the presence of the shabby little claimant of the Crown.  In a moment
he stood all alone, without friend or supporter, a target upon which
was concentrated a bitter fire of scornful and angry looks.  The Lord
Protector called out fiercely--

"Cast the beggar into the street, and scourge him through the town--the
paltry knave is worth no more consideration!"

Officers of the guard sprang forward to obey, but Tom Canty waved them
off and said--

"Back!  Whoso touches him perils his life!"

The Lord Protector was perplexed in the last degree.  He said to the
Lord St. John--

"Searched you well?--but it boots not to ask that.  It doth seem passing
strange.  Little things, trifles, slip out of one's ken, and one does
not think it matter for surprise; but how so bulky a thing as the
Seal of England can vanish away and no man be able to get track of it
again--a massy golden disk--"

Tom Canty, with beaming eyes, sprang forward and shouted--

"Hold, that is enough!  Was it round?--and thick?--and had it letters
and devices graved upon it?--yes?  Oh, _now_ I know what this Great Seal
is that there's been such worry and pother about. An' ye had described
it to me, ye could have had it three weeks ago.  Right well I know where
it lies; but it was not I that put it there--first."

"Who, then, my liege?" asked the Lord Protector.

"He that stands there--the rightful King of England.  And he shall tell
you himself where it lies--then you will believe he knew it of his own
knowledge.  Bethink thee, my King--spur thy memory--it was the last, the
very _last_ thing thou didst that day before thou didst rush forth from
the palace, clothed in my rags, to punish the soldier that insulted me."

A silence ensued, undisturbed by a movement or a whisper, and all eyes
were fixed upon the new-comer, who stood, with bent head and corrugated
brow, groping in his memory among a thronging multitude of valueless
recollections for one single little elusive fact, which, found, would
seat him upon a throne--unfound, would leave him as he was, for good and
all--a pauper and an outcast.  Moment after moment passed--the moments
built themselves into minutes--still the boy struggled silently on, and
gave no sign.  But at last he heaved a sigh, shook his head slowly, and
said, with a trembling lip and in a despondent voice--

"I call the scene back--all of it--but the Seal hath no place in it."
 He paused, then looked up, and said with gentle dignity, "My lords and
gentlemen, if ye will rob your rightful sovereign of his own for lack of
this evidence which he is not able to furnish, I may not stay ye, being
powerless.  But--"

"Oh, folly, oh, madness, my King!" cried Tom Canty, in a panic,
"wait!--think!  Do not give up!--the cause is not lost!  Nor _shall_ be,
neither! List to what I say--follow every word--I am going to bring that
morning back again, every hap just as it happened.  We talked--I told
you of my sisters, Nan and Bet--ah, yes, you remember that; and about
mine old grandam--and the rough games of the lads of Offal Court--yes,
you remember these things also; very well, follow me still, you shall
recall everything.  You gave me food and drink, and did with princely
courtesy send away the servants, so that my low breeding might not shame
me before them--ah, yes, this also you remember."

As Tom checked off his details, and the other boy nodded his head in
recognition of them, the great audience and the officials stared in
puzzled wonderment; the tale sounded like true history, yet how could
this impossible conjunction between a prince and a beggar-boy have come
about?  Never was a company of people so perplexed, so interested, and
so stupefied, before.

"For a jest, my prince, we did exchange garments.  Then we stood before
a mirror; and so alike were we that both said it seemed as if there had
been no change made--yes, you remember that.  Then you noticed that the
soldier had hurt my hand--look! here it is, I cannot yet even write with
it, the fingers are so stiff.  At this your Highness sprang up, vowing
vengeance upon that soldier, and ran towards the door--you passed a
table--that thing you call the Seal lay on that table--you snatched
it up and looked eagerly about, as if for a place to hide it--your eye
caught sight of--"

"There, 'tis sufficient!--and the good God be thanked!" exclaimed the
ragged claimant, in a mighty excitement.  "Go, my good St. John--in an
arm-piece of the Milanese armour that hangs on the wall, thou'lt find
the Seal!"

"Right, my King! right!" cried Tom Canty; "_Now_ the sceptre of England
is thine own; and it were better for him that would dispute it that he
had been born dumb!  Go, my Lord St. John, give thy feet wings!"

The whole assemblage was on its feet now, and well-nigh out of its mind
with uneasiness, apprehension, and consuming excitement.  On the floor
and on the platform a deafening buzz of frantic conversation burst
forth, and for some time nobody knew anything or heard anything or was
interested in anything but what his neighbour was shouting into his ear,
or he was shouting into his neighbour's ear.  Time--nobody knew how much
of it--swept by unheeded and unnoted.  At last a sudden hush fell upon
the house, and in the same moment St. John appeared upon the platform,
and held the Great Seal aloft in his hand.  Then such a shout went up--

"Long live the true King!"

For five minutes the air quaked with shouts and the crash of musical
instruments, and was white with a storm of waving handkerchiefs; and
