liked to treat them to a glass of his best), and through the closed
doors Caroline heard their boyish laughter, and the vacant cackle of
their voices. Her fear was lest they should stay to tea, for she had no
pleasure in making tea for that particular trio. What distinctions
people draw! These three were men--young men--educated men, like Moore;
yet, for her, how great the difference! Their society was a bore--his a
delight.

Not only was she destined to be favoured with their clerical company,
but Fortune was at this moment bringing her four other guests--lady
guests, all packed in a pony-phaeton now rolling somewhat heavily along
the road from Whinbury: an elderly lady and three of her buxom daughters
were coming to see her "in a friendly way," as the custom of that
neighbourhood was. Yes, a fourth time the bell clanged. Fanny brought
the present announcement to the drawing-room,--

"Mrs. Sykes and the three Misses Sykes."

When Caroline was going to receive company, her habit was to wring her
hands very nervously, to flush a little, and come forward hurriedly yet
hesitatingly, wishing herself meantime at Jericho. She was, at such
crises, sadly deficient in finished manner, though she had once been at
school a year. Accordingly, on this occasion, her small white hands
sadly maltreated each other, while she stood up, waiting the entrance of
Mrs. Sykes.

In stalked that lady, a tall, bilious gentlewoman, who made an ample and
not altogether insincere profession of piety, and was greatly given to
hospitality towards the clergy. In sailed her three daughters, a showy
trio, being all three well-grown, and more or less handsome.

In English country ladies there is this point to be remarked. Whether
young or old, pretty or plain, dull or sprightly, they all (or almost
all) have a certain expression stamped on their features, which seems to
say, "I know--I do not boast of it, but I _know_ that I am the standard
of what is proper; let every one therefore whom I approach, or who
approaches me, keep a sharp lookout, for wherein they differ from me--be
the same in dress, manner, opinion, principle, or practice--therein they
are wrong."

Mrs. and Misses Sykes, far from being exceptions to this observation,
were pointed illustrations of its truth. Miss Mary--a well-looked,
well-meant, and, on the whole, well-dispositioned girl--wore her
complacency with some state, though without harshness. Miss Harriet--a
beauty--carried it more overbearingly; she looked high and cold. Miss
Hannah, who was conceited, dashing, pushing, flourished hers consciously
and openly. The mother evinced it with the gravity proper to her age and
religious fame.

The reception was got through somehow. Caroline "was glad to see them"
(an unmitigated fib), hoped they were well, hoped Mrs. Sykes's cough was
better (Mrs. Sykes had had a cough for the last twenty years), hoped the
Misses Sykes had left their sisters at home well; to which inquiry the
Misses Sykes, sitting on three chairs opposite the music-stool, whereon
Caroline had undesignedly come to anchor, after wavering for some
seconds between it and a large arm-chair, into which she at length
recollected she ought to induct Mrs. Sykes--and indeed that lady saved
her the trouble by depositing herself therein--the Misses Sykes replied
to Caroline by one simultaneous bow, very majestic and mighty awful. A
pause followed. This bow was of a character to ensure silence for the
next five minutes, and it did. Mrs. Sykes then inquired after Mr.
Helstone, and whether he had had any return of rheumatism, and whether
preaching twice on a Sunday fatigued him, and if he was capable of
taking a full service now; and on being assured he was, she and all her
daughters, combining in chorus, expressed their opinion that he was "a
wonderful man of his years."

Pause second.

Miss Mary, getting up the steam in her turn, asked whether Caroline had
attended the Bible Society meeting which had been held at Nunnely last
Thursday night. The negative answer which truth compelled Caroline to
utter--for last Thursday evening she had been sitting at home, reading a
novel which Robert had lent her--elicited a simultaneous expression of
surprise from the lips of the four ladies.

"We were all there," said Miss Mary--"mamma and all of us. We even
persuaded papa to go. Hannah would insist upon it. But he fell asleep
while Mr. Langweilig, the German Moravian minister, was speaking. I felt
quite ashamed, he nodded so."

"And there was Dr. Broadbent," cried Hannah--"such a beautiful speaker!
You couldn't expect it of him, for he is almost a vulgar-looking man."

"But such a dear man," interrupted Mary.

"And such a good man, such a useful man," added her mother.

"Only like a butcher in appearance," interposed the fair, proud Harriet.
"I couldn't bear to look at him. I listened with my eyes shut."

Miss Helstone felt her ignorance and incompetency. Not having seen Dr.
Broadbent, she could not give her opinion. Pause third came on. During
its continuance, Caroline was feeling at her heart's core what a
dreaming fool she was, what an unpractical life she led, how little
fitness there was in her for ordinary intercourse with the ordinary
world. She was feeling how exclusively she had attached herself to the
white cottage in the Hollow, how in the existence of one inmate of that
cottage she had pent all her universe. She was sensible that this would
not do, and that some day she would be forced to make an alteration. It
could not be said that she exactly wished to resemble the ladies before
her, but she wished to become superior to her present self, so as to
feel less scared by their dignity.

The sole means she found of reviving the flagging discourse was by
asking them if they would all stay to tea; and a cruel struggle it cost
her to perform this piece of civility. Mrs. Sykes had begun, "We are
much obliged to you, but----" when in came Fanny once more.

"The gentlemen will stay the evening, ma'am," was the message she
brought from Mr. Helstone.

"What gentlemen have you?" now inquired Mrs. Sykes. Their names were
specified; she and her daughters interchanged glances. The curates were
not to them what they were to Caroline. Mr. Sweeting was quite a
favourite with them; even Mr. Malone rather so, because he was a
clergyman. "Really, since you have company already, I think we will
stay," remarked Mrs. Sykes. "We shall be quite a pleasant little party.
I always like to meet the clergy."

And now Caroline had to usher them upstairs, to help them to unshawl,
smooth their hair, and make themselves smart; to reconduct them to the
drawing-room, to distribute amongst them books of engravings, or odd
things purchased from the Jew-basket. She was obliged to be a purchaser,
though she was but a slack contributor; and if she had possessed plenty
of money, she would rather, when it was brought to the rectory--an awful
incubus!--have purchased the whole stock than contributed a single
pin-cushion.

It ought perhaps to be explained in passing, for the benefit of those
who are not _au fait_ to the mysteries of the "Jew-basket" and
"missionary-basket," that these _meubles_ are willow repositories, of
the capacity of a good-sized family clothes-basket, dedicated to the
purpose of conveying from house to house a monster collection of
pin-cushions, needle-books, card-racks, workbags, articles of infant
wear, etc., etc., etc., made by the willing or reluctant hands of the
Christian ladies of a parish, and sold perforce to the heathenish
gentlemen thereof, at prices unblushingly exorbitant. The proceeds of
such compulsory sales are applied to the conversion of the Jews, the
seeking up of the ten missing tribes, or to the regeneration of the
interesting coloured population of the globe. Each lady contributor
takes it in her turn to keep the basket a month, to sew for it, and to
foist off its contents on a shrinking male public. An exciting time it
is when that turn comes round. Some active-minded woman, with a good
trading spirit, like it, and enjoy exceedingly the fun of making
hard-handed worsted-spinners cash up, to the tune of four or five
hundred per cent. above cost price, for articles quite useless to them;
other feebler souls object to it, and would rather see the prince of
darkness himself at their door any morning than that phantom basket,
brought with "Mrs. Rouse's compliments; and please, ma'am, she says it's
your turn now."

Miss Helstone's duties of hostess performed, more anxiously than
cheerily, she betook herself to the kitchen, to hold a brief
privy-council with Fanny and Eliza about the tea.

"What a lot on 'em!" cried Eliza, who was cook. "And I put off the
baking to-day because I thought there would be bread plenty to fit while
morning. We shall never have enow."

"Are there any tea-cakes?" asked the young mistress.

"Only three and a loaf. I wish these fine folk would stay at home till
they're asked; and I want to finish trimming my hat" (bonnet she meant).

"Then," suggested Caroline, to whom the importance of the emergency gave
a certain energy, "Fanny must run down to Briarfield and buy some
muffins and crumpets and some biscuits. And don't be cross, Eliza; we
can't help it now."

"And which tea-things are we to have?"

"Oh, the best, I suppose. I'll get out the silver service." And she ran
upstairs to the plate-closet, and presently brought down teapot,
cream-ewer, and sugar-basin.

"And mun we have th' urn?"

"Yes; and now get it ready as quickly as you can, for the sooner we have
tea over the sooner they will go--at least, I hope so. Heigh-ho! I wish
they were gone," she sighed, as she returned to the drawing-room.
"Still," she thought, as she paused at the door ere opening it, "if
Robert would but come even now how bright all would be! How
comparatively easy the task of amusing these people if he were present!
There would be an interest in hearing him talk (though he never says
much in company) and in talking in his presence. There can be no
interest in hearing any of them, or in speaking to them. How they will
gabble when the curates come in, and how weary I shall grow with
listening to them! But I suppose I am a selfish fool. These are very
respectable gentlefolks. I ought, no doubt, to be proud of their
countenance. I don't say they are not as good as I am--far from it--but
they are different from me."

She went in.

Yorkshire people in those days took their tea round the table, sitting
well into it, with their knees duly introduced under the mahogany. It
was essential to have a multitude of plates of bread and butter, varied
in sorts and plentiful in quantity. It was thought proper, too, that on
the centre plate should stand a glass dish of marmalade. Among the
viands was expected to be found a small assortment of cheesecakes and
tarts. If there was also a plate of thin slices of pink ham garnished
with green parsley, so much the better.

Eliza, the rector's cook, fortunately knew her business as provider. She
had been put out of humour a little at first, when the invaders came so
unexpectedly in such strength; but it appeared that she regained her
cheerfulness with action, for in due time the tea was spread forth in
handsome style, and neither ham, tarts, nor marmalade were wanting among
its accompaniments.

The curates, summoned to this bounteous repast, entered joyous; but at
once, on seeing the ladies, of whose presence they had not been
forewarned, they came to a stand in the doorway. Malone headed the
party; he stopped short and fell back, almost capsizing Donne, who was
behind him. Donne, staggering three paces in retreat, sent little
Sweeting into the arms of old Helstone, who brought up the rear. There
was some expostulation, some tittering. Malone was desired to mind what
he was about, and urged to push forward, which at last he did, though
colouring to the top of his peaked forehead a bluish purple. Helstone,
advancing, set the shy curates aside, welcomed all his fair guests,
shook hands and passed a jest with each, and seated himself snugly
between the lovely Harriet and the dashing Hannah. Miss Mary he
requested to move to the seat opposite to him, that he might see her if
he couldn't be near her. Perfectly easy and gallant, in his way, were
his manners always to young ladies, and most popular was he amongst
them; yet at heart he neither respected nor liked the sex, and such of
them as circumstances had brought into intimate relation with him had
ever feared rather than loved him.

The curates were left to shift for themselves. Sweeting, who was the
least embarrassed of the three, took refuge beside Mrs. Sykes, who, he
knew, was almost as fond of him as if he had been her son. Donne, after
making his general bow with a grace all his own, and saying in a high,
pragmatical voice, "How d'ye do, Miss Helstone?" dropped into a seat at
Caroline's elbow, to her unmitigated annoyance, for she had a peculiar
antipathy to Donne, on account of his stultified and immovable
self-conceit and his incurable narrowness of mind. Malone, grinning most
unmeaningly, inducted himself into the corresponding seat on the other
side. She was thus blessed in a pair of supporters, neither of whom, she
knew, would be of any mortal use, whether for keeping up the
conversation, handing cups, circulating the muffins, or even lifting the
plate from the slop-basin. Little Sweeting, small and boyish as he was,
would have been worth twenty of them.

Malone, though a ceaseless talker when there were only men present, was
usually tongue-tied in the presence of ladies. Three phrases, however,
he had ready cut and dried, which he never failed to produce:--

1stly. "Have you had a walk to-day, Miss Helstone?"

2ndly. "Have you seen your cousin Moore lately?"

3rdly. "Does your class at the Sunday school keep up its number?"

These three questions being put and responded to, between Caroline and
Malone reigned silence.

With Donne it was otherwise; he was troublesome, exasperating. He had a
stock of small-talk on hand, at once the most trite and perverse that
can well be imagined--abuse of the people of Briarfield; of the natives
of Yorkshire generally; complaints of the want of high society; of the
backward state of civilization in these districts; murmurings against
the disrespectful conduct of the lower orders in the north toward their
betters; silly ridicule of the manner of living in these parts--the want
of style, the absence of elegance, as if he, Donne, had been accustomed
to very great doings indeed, an insinuation which his somewhat underbred
manner and aspect failed to bear out. These strictures, he seemed to
think, must raise him in the estimation of Miss Helstone or of any other
lady who heard him; whereas with her, at least, they brought him to a
level below contempt, though sometimes, indeed, they incensed her; for,
a Yorkshire girl herself, she hated to hear Yorkshire abused by such a
pitiful prater; and when wrought up to a certain pitch, she would turn
and say something of which neither the matter nor the manner recommended
her to Mr. Donne's good-will. She would tell him it was no proof of
refinement to be ever scolding others for vulgarity, and no sign of a
good pastor to be eternally censuring his flock. She would ask him what
he had entered the church for, since he complained there were only
cottages to visit, and poor people to preach to--whether he had been
ordained to the ministry merely to wear soft clothing and sit in king's
houses. These questions were considered by all the curates as, to the
last degree, audacious and impious.

Tea was a long time in progress; all the guests gabbled as their hostess
had expected they would. Mr. Helstone, being in excellent spirits--when,
indeed, was he ever otherwise in society, attractive female society? it
being only with the one lady of his own family that he maintained a grim
taciturnity--kept up a brilliant flow of easy prattle with his
right-hand and left-hand neighbours, and even with his _vis-à-vis_, Miss
Mary; though, as Mary was the most sensible, the least coquettish, of
the three, to her the elderly widower was the least attentive. At heart
he could not abide sense in women. He liked to see them as silly, as
light-headed, as vain, as open to ridicule as possible, because they
were then in reality what he held them to be, and wished them to
be--inferior, toys to play with, to amuse a vacant hour, and to be
thrown away.

Hannah was his favourite. Harriet, though beautiful, egotistical, and
self-satisfied, was not quite weak enough for him. She had some genuine
self-respect amidst much false pride, and if she did not talk like an
oracle, neither would she babble like one crazy; she would not permit
herself to be treated quite as a doll, a child, a plaything; she
expected to be bent to like a queen.

Hannah, on the contrary, demanded no respect, only flattery. If her
admirers only _told_ her that she was an angel, she would let them
_treat_ her like an idiot. So very credulous and frivolous was she, so
very silly did she become when besieged with attention, flattered and
admired to the proper degree, that there were moments when Helstone
actually felt tempted to commit matrimony a second time, and to try the
experiment of taking her for his second helpmeet; but fortunately the
salutary recollection of the _ennuis_ of his first marriage, the
impression still left on him of the weight of the millstone he had once
worn round his neck, the fixity of his feelings respecting the
insufferable evils of conjugal existence, operated as a check to his
tenderness, suppressed the sigh heaving his old iron lungs, and
restrained him from whispering to Hannah proposals it would have been
high fun and great satisfaction to her to hear.

It is probable she would have married him if he had asked her; her
parents would have quite approved the match. To them his fifty-five
years, his bend-leather heart, could have presented no obstacles; and as
he was a rector, held an excellent living, occupied a good house, and
was supposed even to have private property (though in that the world was
mistaken; every penny of the £5,000 inherited by him from his father had
been devoted to the building and endowing of a new church at his native
village in Lancashire--for he could show a lordly munificence when he
pleased, and if the end was to his liking, never hesitated about making
a grand sacrifice to attain it)--her parents, I say, would have
delivered Hannah over to his lovingkindness and his tender mercies
without one scruple; and the second Mrs. Helstone, inverting the natural
order of insect existence, would have fluttered through the honeymoon a
bright, admired butterfly, and crawled the rest of her days a sordid,
trampled worm.

Little Mr. Sweeting, seated between Mrs. Sykes and Miss Mary, both of
whom were very kind to him, and having a dish of tarts before him, and
marmalade and crumpet upon his plate, looked and felt more content than
any monarch. He was fond of all the Misses Sykes; they were all fond of
him. He thought them magnificent girls, quite proper to mate with one of
his inches. If he had a cause of regret at this blissful moment, it was
that Miss Dora happened to be absent--Dora being the one whom he
secretly hoped one day to call Mrs. David Sweeting, with whom he dreamt
of taking stately walks, leading her like an empress through the village
of Nunnely; and an empress she would have been, if size could make an
empress. She was vast, ponderous. Seen from behind, she had the air of a
very stout lady of forty; but withal she possessed a good face, and no
unkindly character.

The meal at last drew to a close. It would have been over long ago if
Mr. Donne had not persisted in sitting with his cup half full of cold
tea before him, long after the rest had finished and after he himself
had discussed such allowance of viands as he felt competent to
swallow--long, indeed, after signs of impatience had been manifested
all round the board, till chairs were pushed back, till the talk
flagged, till silence fell. Vainly did Caroline inquire repeatedly if he
would have another cup, if he would take a little hot tea, as that must
be cold, etc.; he would neither drink it nor leave it. He seemed to
think that this isolated position of his gave him somehow a certain
importance, that it was dignified and stately to be the last, that it
was grand to keep all the others waiting. So long did he linger, that
the very urn died; it ceased to hiss. At length, however, the old rector
himself, who had hitherto been too pleasantly engaged with Hannah to
care for the delay, got impatient.

"For whom are we waiting?" he asked.

"For me, I believe," returned Donne complacently, appearing to think it
much to his credit that a party should thus be kept dependent on his
movements.

"Tut!" cried Helstone. Then standing up, "Let us return thanks," said
he; which he did forthwith, and all quitted the table. Donne, nothing
abashed, still sat ten minutes quite alone, whereupon Mr. Helstone rang
the bell for the things to be removed. The curate at length saw himself
forced to empty his cup, and to relinquish the _rôle_ which, he thought,
had given him such a felicitous distinction, drawing upon him such
flattering general notice.

And now, in the natural course of events (Caroline, knowing how it would
be, had opened the piano, and produced music-books in readiness), music
was asked for. This was Mr. Sweeting's chance for showing off. He was
eager to commence. He undertook, therefore, the arduous task of
persuading the young ladies to favour the company with an air--a song.
_Con amore_ he went through the whole business of begging, praying,
resisting excuses, explaining away difficulties, and at last succeeded
in persuading Miss Harriet to allow herself to be led to the instrument.
Then out came the pieces of his flute (he always carried them in his
pocket, as unfailingly as he carried his handkerchief). They were
screwed and arranged, Malone and Donne meanwhile herding together and
sneering at him, which the little man, glancing over his shoulder, saw,
but did not heed at all. He was persuaded their sarcasm all arose from
envy. They could not accompany the ladies as he could; he was about to
enjoy a triumph over them.

The triumph began. Malone, much chagrined at hearing him pipe up in most
superior style, determined to earn distinction too, if possible, and
all at once assuming the character of a swain (which character he had
endeavoured to enact once or twice before, but in which he had not
hitherto met with the success he doubtless opined his merits deserved),
approached a sofa on which Miss Helstone was seated, and depositing his
great Irish frame near her, tried his hand (or rather tongue) at a fine
speech or two, accompanied by grins the most extraordinary and
incomprehensible. In the course of his efforts to render himself
agreeable, he contrived to possess himself of the two long sofa cushions
and a square one; with which, after rolling them about for some time
with strange gestures, he managed to erect a sort of barrier between
himself and the object of his attentions. Caroline, quite willing that
they should be sundered, soon devised an excuse for stepping over to the
opposite side of the room, and taking up a position beside Mrs. Sykes,
of which good lady she entreated some instruction in a new stitch in
ornamental knitting, a favour readily granted; and thus Peter Augustus
was thrown out.

Very sullenly did his countenance lower when he saw himself
abandoned--left entirely to his own resources, on a large sofa, with the
charge of three small cushions on his hands. The fact was, he felt
disposed seriously to cultivate acquaintance with Miss Helstone, because
he thought, in common with others, that her uncle possessed money, and
concluded that, since he had no children, he would probably leave it to
his niece. Gérard Moore was better instructed on this point: he had seen
the neat church that owed its origin to the rector's zeal and cash, and
more than once, in his inmost soul, had cursed an expensive caprice
which crossed his wishes.

The evening seemed long to one person in that room. Caroline at
intervals dropped her knitting on her lap, and gave herself up to a sort
of brain-lethargy--closing her eyes and depressing her head--caused by
what seemed to her the unmeaning hum around her,--the inharmonious,
tasteless rattle of the piano keys, the squeaking and gasping notes of
the flute, the laughter and mirth of her uncle, and Hannah, and Mary,
she could not tell whence originating, for she heard nothing comic or
gleeful in their discourse; and more than all, by the interminable
gossip of Mrs. Sykes murmured close at her ear, gossip which rang the
changes on four subjects--her own health and that of the various
members of her family; the missionary and Jew baskets and their
contents; the late meeting at Nunnely, and one which was expected to
come off next week at Whinbury.

Tired at length to exhaustion, she embraced the opportunity of Mr.
Sweeting coming up to speak to Mrs. Sykes to slip quietly out of the
apartment, and seek a moment's respite in solitude. She repaired to the
dining-room, where the clear but now low remnant of a fire still burned
in the grate. The place was empty and quiet, glasses and decanters were
cleared from the table, the chairs were put back in their places, all
was orderly. Caroline sank into her uncle's large easy-chair, half shut
her eyes, and rested herself--rested at least her limbs, her senses, her
hearing, her vision--weary with listening to nothing, and gazing on
vacancy. As to her mind, that flew directly to the Hollow. It stood on
the threshold of the parlour there, then it passed to the
counting-house, and wondered which spot was blessed by the presence of
Robert. It so happened that neither locality had that honour; for Robert
was half a mile away from both, and much nearer to Caroline than her
deadened spirit suspected. He was at this moment crossing the
churchyard, approaching the rectory garden-gate--not, however, coming to
see his cousin, but intent solely on communicating a brief piece of
intelligence to the rector.

Yes, Caroline; you hear the wire of the bell vibrate; it rings again for
the fifth time this afternoon. You start, and you are certain now that
this must be he of whom you dream. Why you are so certain you cannot
explain to yourself, but you know it. You lean forward, listening
eagerly as Fanny opens the door. Right! That is _the_ voice--low, with
the slight foreign accent, but so sweet, as you fancy. You half rise.
"Fanny will tell him Mr. Helstone is with company, and then he will go
away." Oh! she cannot let him go. In spite of herself, in spite of her
reason, she walks half across the room; she stands ready to dart out in
case the step should retreat; but he enters the passage. "Since your
master is engaged," he says, "just show me into the dining-room. Bring
me pen and ink. I will write a short note and leave it for him."

Now, having caught these words, and hearing him advance, Caroline, if
there was a door within the dining-room, would glide through it and
disappear. She feels caught, hemmed in; she dreads her unexpected
presence may annoy him. A second since she would have flown to him;
that second past, she would flee from him. She cannot. There is no way
of escape. The dining-room has but one door, through which now enters
her cousin. The look of troubled surprise she expected to see in his
face has appeared there, has shocked her, and is gone. She has stammered
a sort of apology:--

"I only left the drawing-room a minute for a little quiet."

There was something so diffident and downcast in the air and tone with
which she said this, any one might perceive that some saddening change
had lately passed over her prospects, and that the faculty of cheerful
self-possession had left her. Mr. Moore, probably, remembered how she
had formerly been accustomed to meet him with gentle ardour and hopeful
confidence. He must have seen how the check of this morning had
operated. Here was an opportunity for carrying out his new system with
effect, if he chose to improve it. Perhaps he found it easier to
practise that system in broad daylight, in his mill-yard, amidst busy
occupations, than in a quiet parlour, disengaged, at the hour of
eventide. Fanny lit the candles, which before had stood unlit on the
table, brought writing materials, and left the room. Caroline was about
to follow her. Moore, to act consistently, should have let her go;
whereas he stood in the doorway, and, holding out his hand, gently kept
her back. He did not ask her to stay, but he would not let her go.

"Shall I tell my uncle you are here?" asked she, still in the same
subdued voice.

"No; I can say to you all I had to say to him. You will be my
messenger?"

"Yes, Robert."

"Then you may just inform him that I have got a clue to the identity of
one, at least, of the men who broke my frames; that he belongs to the
same gang who attacked Sykes and Pearson's dressing-shop, and that I
hope to have him in custody to-morrow. You can remember that?"

"Oh yes!" These two monosyllables were uttered in a sadder tone than
ever; and as she said them she shook her head slightly and sighed. "Will
you prosecute him?"

"Doubtless."

"No, Robert."

"And why no, Caroline?"

"Because it will set all the neighbourhood against you more than ever."

"That is no reason why I should not do my duty, and defend my property.
This fellow is a great scoundrel, and ought to be incapacitated from
perpetrating further mischief."

"But his accomplices will take revenge on you. You do not know how the
people of this country bear malice. It is the boast of some of them that
they can keep a stone in their pocket seven years, turn it at the end of
that time, keep it seven years longer, and hurl it and hit their mark
'at last.'"

Moore laughed.

"A most pithy vaunt," said he--"one that redounds vastly to the credit
of your dear Yorkshire friends. But don't fear for me, Lina. I am on my
guard against these lamb-like compatriots of yours. Don't make yourself
uneasy about me."

"How can I help it? You are my cousin. If anything happened----" She
stopped.

"Nothing will happen, Lina. To speak in your own language, there is a
Providence above all--is there not?"

"Yes, dear Robert. May He guard you!"

"And if prayers have efficacy, yours will benefit me. You pray for me
sometimes?"

"Not _sometimes_, Robert. You, and Louis, and Hortense are _always_
remembered."

"So I have often imagined. It has occurred to me when, weary and vexed,
I have myself gone to bed like a heathen, that another had asked
forgiveness for my day, and safety for my night. I don't suppose such
vicarial piety will avail much, but the petitions come out of a sincere
breast, from innocent lips. They should be acceptable as Abel's
offering; and doubtless would be, if the object deserved them."

"Annihilate that doubt. It is groundless."

"When a man has been brought up only to make money, and lives to make
it, and for nothing else, and scarcely breathes any other air than that
of mills and markets, it seems odd to utter his name in a prayer, or to
mix his idea with anything divine; and very strange it seems that a
good, pure heart should take him in and harbour him, as if he had any
claim to that sort of nest. If I could guide that benignant heart, I
believe I should counsel it to exclude one who does not profess to have
any higher aim in life than that of patching up his broken fortune, and
wiping clean from his _bourgeois_ scutcheon the foul stain of
bankruptcy."

The hint, though conveyed thus tenderly and modestly (as Caroline
thought), was felt keenly and comprehended clearly.

"Indeed, I only think--or I _will only_ think--of you as my cousin," was
the quick answer. "I am beginning to understand things better than I
did, Robert, when you first came to England--better than I did a week, a
day ago. I know it is your duty to try to get on, and that it won't do
for you to be romantic; but in future you must not misunderstand me if I
seem friendly. You misunderstood me this morning, did you not?"

"What made you think so?"

"Your look--your manner."

"But look at me now----"

"Oh! you are different now. At present I dare speak to you."

"Yet I am the same, except that I have left the tradesman behind me in
the Hollow. Your kinsman alone stands before you."

"My cousin Robert--not Mr. Moore."

"Not a bit of Mr. Moore. Caroline----"

Here the company was heard rising in the other room. The door was
opened; the pony-carriage was ordered; shawls and bonnets were demanded;
Mr. Helstone called for his niece.

"I must go, Robert."

"Yes, you must go, or they will come in and find us here; and I, rather
than meet all that host in the passage, will take my departure through
the window. Luckily it opens like a door. One minute only--put down the
candle an instant--good-night. I kiss you because we are cousins, and,
being cousins, one--two--three kisses are allowable. Caroline,
good-night."




CHAPTER VIII.

NOAH AND MOSES.


The next day Moore had risen before the sun, and had taken a ride to
Whinbury and back ere his sister had made the café au lait or cut the
tartines for his breakfast. What business he transacted there he kept to
himself. Hortense asked no questions: it was not her wont to comment on
his movements, nor his to render an account of them. The secrets of
business--complicated and often dismal mysteries--were buried in his
breast, and never came out of their sepulchre save now and then to scare
Joe Scott, or give a start to some foreign correspondent. Indeed, a
general habit of reserve on whatever was important seemed bred in his
mercantile blood.

Breakfast over, he went to his counting-house. Henry, Joe Scott's boy,
brought in the letters and the daily papers; Moore seated himself at his
desk, broke the seals of the documents, and glanced them over. They were
all short, but not, it seemed, sweet--probably rather sour, on the
contrary, for as Moore laid down the last, his nostrils emitted a
derisive and defiant snuff, and though he burst into no soliloquy, there
was a glance in his eye which seemed to invoke the devil, and lay
charges on him to sweep the whole concern to Gehenna. However, having
chosen a pen and stripped away the feathered top in a brief spasm of
finger-fury (only finger-fury--his face was placid), he dashed off a
batch of answers, sealed them, and then went out and walked through the
mill. On coming back he sat down to read his newspaper.

The contents seemed not absorbingly interesting; he more than once laid
it across his knee, folded his arms, and gazed into the fire; he
occasionally turned his head towards the window; he looked at intervals
at his watch; in short, his mind appeared preoccupied. Perhaps he was
thinking of the beauty of the weather--for it was a fine and mild
morning for the season--and wishing to be out in the fields enjoying
it. The door of his counting-house stood wide open. The breeze and
sunshine entered freely; but the first visitant brought no spring
perfume on its wings, only an occasional sulphur-puff from the
soot-thick column of smoke rushing sable from the gaunt mill-chimney.

A dark-blue apparition (that of Joe Scott, fresh from a dyeing vat)
appeared momentarily at the open door, uttered the words "He's comed,
sir," and vanished.

Mr. Moore raised not his eyes from the paper. A large man,
broad-shouldered and massive-limbed, clad in fustian garments and gray
worsted stockings, entered, who was received with a nod, and desired to
take a seat, which he did, making the remark, as he removed his hat (a
very bad one), stowed it away under his chair, and wiped his forehead
with a spotted cotton handkerchief extracted from the hat-crown, that it
was "raight dahn warm for Febewerry." Mr. Moore assented--at least he
uttered some slight sound, which, though inarticulate, might pass for an
assent. The visitor now carefully deposited in the corner beside him an
official-looking staff which he bore in his hand; this done, he
whistled, probably by way of appearing at his ease.

"You have what is necessary, I suppose?" said Mr. Moore.

"Ay, ay! all's right."

He renewed his whistling, Mr. Moore his reading. The paper apparently
had become more interesting. Presently, however, he turned to his
cupboard, which was within reach of his long arm, opened it without
rising, took out a black bottle--the same he had produced for Malone's
benefit--a tumbler, and a jug, placed them on the table, and said to his
guest,--

"Help yourself; there's water in that jar in the corner."

"I dunnut knaw that there's mich need, for all a body is dry (thirsty)
in a morning," said the fustian gentleman, rising and doing as
requested.

"Will you tak naught yourseln, Mr. Moore?" he inquired, as with skilled
hand he mixed a portion, and having tested it by a deep draught, sank
back satisfied and bland in his seat. Moore, chary of words, replied by
a negative movement and murmur.

"Yah'd as good," continued his visitor; "it 'uld set ye up wald a sup o'
this stuff. Uncommon good hollands. Ye get it fro' furrin parts, I'se
think?"

"Ay!"

"Tak my advice and try a glass on't. Them lads 'at's coming 'll keep ye
talking, nob'dy knows how long. Ye'll need propping."

"Have you seen Mr. Sykes this morning?" inquired Moore.

"I seed him a hauf an hour--nay, happen a quarter of an hour sin', just
afore I set off. He said he aimed to come here, and I sudn't wonder but
ye'll have old Helstone too. I seed 'em saddling his little nag as I
passed at back o' t' rectory."

The speaker was a true prophet, for the trot of a little nag's hoofs
was, five minutes after, heard in the yard. It stopped, and a well-known
nasal voice cried aloud, "Boy" (probably addressing Harry Scott, who
usually hung about the premises from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.), "take my horse
and lead him into the stable."

Helstone came in marching nimbly and erect, looking browner, keener, and
livelier than usual.

"Beautiful morning, Moore. How do, my boy? Ha! whom have we here?"
(turning to the personage with the staff). "Sugden! What! you're going
to work directly? On my word, you lose no time. But I come to ask
explanations. Your message was delivered to me. Are you sure you are on
the right scent? How do you mean to set about the business? Have you got
a warrant?"

"Sugden has."

"Then you are going to seek him now? I'll accompany you."

"You will be spared that trouble, sir; he is coming to seek me. I'm just
now sitting in state waiting his arrival."

"And who is it? One of my parishioners?"

Joe Scott had entered unobserved. He now stood, a most sinister phantom,
half his person being dyed of the deepest tint of indigo, leaning on the
desk. His master's answer to the rector's question was a smile. Joe took
the word. Putting on a quiet but pawky look, he said,--

"It's a friend of yours, Mr. Helstone, a gentleman you often speak of."

"Indeed! His name, Joe? You look well this morning."

"Only the Rev. Moses Barraclough; t' tub orator you call him sometimes,
I think."

"Ah!" said the rector, taking out his snuff-box, and administering to
himself a very long pinch--"ah! couldn't have supposed it. Why, the
pious man never was a workman of yours, Moore. He's a tailor by trade."

"And so much the worse grudge I owe him, for interfering and setting my
discarded men against me."

"And Moses was actually present at the battle of Stilbro' Moor? He went
there, wooden leg and all?"

"Ay, sir," said Joe; "he went there on horseback, that his leg mightn't
be noticed. He was the captain, and wore a mask. The rest only had their
faces blackened."

"And how was he found out?"

"I'll tell you, sir," said Joe. "T' maister's not so fond of talking.
I've no objections. He courted Sarah, Mr. Moore's sarvant lass, and so
it seems she would have nothing to say to him; she either didn't like
his wooden leg or she'd some notion about his being a hypocrite. Happen
(for women is queer hands; we may say that amang werseln when there's
none of 'em nigh) she'd have encouraged him, in spite of his leg and his
deceit, just to pass time like. I've known some on 'em do as mich, and
some o' t' bonniest and mimmest-looking, too--ay, I've seen clean, trim
young things, that looked as denty and pure as daisies, and wi' time a
body fun' 'em out to be nowt but stinging, venomed nettles."

"Joe's a sensible fellow," interjected Helstone.

"Howsiver, Sarah had another string to her bow. Fred Murgatroyd, one of
our lads, is for her; and as women judge men by their faces--and Fred
has a middling face, while Moses is none so handsome, as we all
knaw--the lass took on wi' Fred. A two-three months sin', Murgatroyd and
Moses chanced to meet one Sunday night; they'd both come lurking about
these premises wi' the notion of counselling Sarah to tak a bit of a
walk wi' them. They fell out, had a tussle, and Fred was worsted, for
he's young and small, and Barraclough, for all he has only one leg, is
almost as strong as Sugden there--indeed, anybody that hears him roaring
at a revival or a love-feast may be sure he's no weakling."

"Joe, you're insupportable," here broke in Mr. Moore. "You spin out your
explanation as Moses spins out his sermons. The long and short of it is,
Murgatroyd was jealous of Barraclough; and last night, as he and a
friend took shelter in a barn from a shower, they heard and saw Moses
conferring with some associates within. From their discourse it was
plain he had been the leader, not only at Stilbro' Moor, but in the
attack on Sykes's property. Moreover they planned a deputation to wait
on me this morning, which the tailor is to head, and which, in the most
religious and peaceful spirit, is to entreat me to put the accursed
thing out of my tent. I rode over to Whinbury this morning, got a
constable and a warrant, and I am now waiting to give my friend the
reception he deserves. Here, meantime, comes Sykes. Mr. Helstone, you
must spirit him up. He feels timid at the thoughts of prosecuting."

A gig was heard to roll into the yard. Mr. Sykes entered--a tall stout
man of about fifty, comely of feature, but feeble of physiognomy. He
looked anxious.

"Have they been? Are they gone? Have you got him? Is it over?" he asked.

"Not yet," returned Moore with phlegm. "We are waiting for them."

"They'll not come; it's near noon. Better give it up. It will excite bad
feeling--make a stir--cause perhaps fatal consequences."

"_You_ need not appear," said Moore. "I shall meet them in the yard when
they come; _you_ can stay here."

"But my name must be seen in the law proceedings. A wife and family, Mr.
Moore--a wife and family make a man cautious."

Moore looked disgusted. "Give way, if you please," said he; "leave me to
myself. I have no objection to act alone; only be assured you will not
find safety in submission. Your partner Pearson gave way, and conceded,
and forbore. Well, that did not prevent them from attempting to shoot
him in his own house."

"My dear sir, take a little wine and water," recommended Mr. Helstone.
The wine and water was hollands and water, as Mr. Sykes discovered when
he had compounded and swallowed a brimming tumbler thereof. It
transfigured him in two minutes, brought the colour back to his face,
and made him at least _word_-valiant. He now announced that he hoped he
was above being trampled on by the common people; he was determined to
endure the insolence of the working-classes no longer; he had considered
of it, and made up his mind to go all lengths; if money and spirit could
put down these rioters, they should be put down; Mr. Moore might do as
he liked, but _he_--Christie Sykes--would spend his last penny in law
before he would be beaten; he'd settle them, or he'd see.

"Take another glass," urged Moore.

Mr. Sykes didn't mind if he did. This was a cold morning (Sugden had
found it a warm one); it was necessary to be careful at this season of
the year--it was proper to take something to keep the damp out; he had a
little cough already (here he coughed in attestation of the fact);
something of this sort (lifting the black bottle) was excellent, taken
medicinally (he poured the physic into his tumbler); he didn't make a
practice of drinking spirits in a morning, but occasionally it really
was prudent to take precautions.

"Quite prudent, and take them by all means," urged the host.

Mr. Sykes now addressed Mr. Helstone, who stood on the hearth, his
shovel-hat on his head, watching him significantly with his little, keen
eyes.

"You, sir, as a clergyman," said he, "may feel it disagreeable to be
present amidst scenes of hurry and flurry, and, I may say, peril. I dare
say your nerves won't stand it. You're a man of peace, sir; but we
manufacturers, living in the world, and always in turmoil, get quite
belligerent. Really, there's an ardour excited by the thoughts of danger
that makes my heart pant. When Mrs. Sykes is afraid of the house being
attacked and broke open--as she is every night--I get quite excited. I
couldn't describe to you, sir, my feelings. Really, if anybody was to
come--thieves or anything--I believe I should enjoy it, such is my
spirit."

The hardest of laughs, though brief and low, and by no means insulting,
was the response of the rector. Moore would have pressed upon the heroic
mill-owner a third tumbler, but the clergyman, who never transgressed,
nor would suffer others in his presence to transgress, the bounds of
decorum, checked him.

"Enough is as good as a feast, is it not, Mr. Sykes?" he said; and Mr.
Sykes assented, and then sat and watched Joe Scott remove the bottle at
a sign from Helstone, with a self-satisfied simper on his lips and a
regretful glisten in his eye. Moore looked as if he should have liked to
fool him to the top of his bent. What would a certain young kinswoman of
his have said could she have seen her dear, good, great Robert--her
Coriolanus--just now? Would she have acknowledged in that mischievous,
sardonic visage the same face to which she had looked up with such love,
which had bent over her with such gentleness last night? Was that the
man who had spent so quiet an evening with his sister and his cousin--so
suave to one, so tender to the other--reading Shakespeare and listening
to Chénier?

Yes, it was the same man, only seen on a different side--a side Caroline
had not yet fairly beheld, though perhaps she had enough sagacity
faintly to suspect its existence. Well, Caroline had, doubtless, her
defective side too. She was human. She must, then, have been very
imperfect; and had she seen Moore on his very worst side, she would
probably have said this to herself and excused him. Love can excuse
anything except meanness; but meanness kills love, cripples even natural
affection; without esteem true love cannot exist. Moore, with all his
faults, might be esteemed; for he had no moral scrofula in his mind, no
hopeless polluting taint--such, for instance, as that of falsehood;
neither was he the slave of his appetites. The active life to which he
had been born and bred had given him something else to do than to join
the futile chase of the pleasure-hunter. He was a man undegraded, the
disciple of reason, _not_ the votary of sense. The same might be said of
old Helstone. Neither of these two would look, think, or speak a lie;
for neither of them had the wretched black bottle, which had just been
put away, any charms. Both might boast a valid claim to the proud title
of "lord of the creation," for no animal vice was lord of them; they
looked and were superior beings to poor Sykes.

A sort of gathering and trampling sound was heard in the yard, and then
a pause. Moore walked to the window; Helstone followed. Both stood on
one side, the tall junior behind the under-sized senior, looking forth
carefully, so that they might not be visible from without. Their sole
comment on what they saw was a cynical smile flashed into each other's
stern eyes.

A flourishing oratorical cough was now heard, followed by the
interjection "Whisht!" designed, as it seemed, to still the hum of
several voices. Moore opened his casement an inch or two to admit sound
more freely.

"Joseph Scott," began a snuffling voice--Scott was standing sentinel at
the counting-house door--"might we inquire if your master be within, and
is to be spoken to?"

"He's within, ay," said Joe nonchalantly.

"Would you then, if _you_ please" (emphasis on "you"), "have the
goodness to tell _him_ that twelve gentlemen wants to see him."

"He'd happen ax what for," suggested Joe. "I mught as weel tell him that
at t' same time."

"For a purpose," was the answer. Joe entered.

"Please, sir, there's twelve gentlemen wants to see ye, 'for a
purpose.'"

"Good, Joe; I'm their man.--Sugden, come when I whistle."

Moore went out, chuckling dryly. He advanced into the yard, one hand in
his pocket, the other in his waistcoat, his cap brim over his eyes,
shading in some measure their deep dancing ray of scorn. Twelve men
waited in the yard, some in their shirt-sleeves, some in blue aprons.
Two figured conspicuously in the van of the party. One, a little dapper
strutting man with a turned-up nose; the other a broad-shouldered
fellow, distinguished no less by his demure face and cat like, trustless
eyes than by a wooden leg and stout crutch. There was a kind of leer
about his lips; he seemed laughing in his sleeve at some person or
thing; his whole air was anything but that of a true man.

"Good-morning, Mr. Barraclough," said Moore debonairly, for him.

"Peace be unto you!" was the answer, Mr. Barraclough entirely closing
his naturally half-shut eyes as he delivered it.

"I'm obliged to you. Peace is an excellent thing; there's nothing I more
wish for myself. But that is not all you have to say to me, I suppose? I
imagine peace is not your purpose?"

"As to our purpose," began Barraclough, "it's one that may sound strange
and perhaps foolish to ears like yours, for the childer of this world is
wiser in their generation than the childer of light."

"To the point, if you please, and let me hear what it is."

"Ye'se hear, sir. If I cannot get it off, there's eleven behint can help
me. It is a grand purpose, and" (changing his voice from a half-sneer to
a whine) "it's the Looard's own purpose, and that's better."

"Do you want a subscription to a new Ranter's chapel, Mr. Barraclough?
Unless your errand be something of that sort, I cannot see what you have
to do with it."

"I hadn't that duty on my mind, sir; but as Providence has led ye to
mention the subject, I'll make it i' my way to tak ony trifle ye may
have to spare; the smallest contribution will be acceptable."

With that he doffed his hat, and held it out as a begging-box, a brazen
grin at the same time crossing his countenance.

"If I gave you sixpence you would drink it."

Barraclough uplifted the palms of his hands and the whites of his eyes,
evincing in the gesture a mere burlesque of hypocrisy.

"You seem a fine fellow," said Moore, quite coolly and dryly; "you don't
care for showing me that you are a double-dyed hypocrite, that your
trade is fraud. You expect indeed to make me laugh at the cleverness
with which you play your coarsely farcical part, while at the same time
you think you are deceiving the men behind you."

Moses' countenance lowered. He saw he had gone too far. He was going to
answer, when the second leader, impatient of being hitherto kept in the
background, stepped forward. This man did not look like a traitor,
though he had an exceedingly self-confident and conceited air.

"Mr. Moore," commenced he, speaking also in his throat and nose, and
enunciating each word very slowly, as if with a view to giving his
audience time to appreciate fully the uncommon elegance of the
phraseology, "it might, perhaps, justly be said that reason rather than
peace is our purpose. We come, in the first place, to request you to
hear reason; and should _you_ refuse, it is my duty to warn _you_, in
very decided terms, that measures will be had resort to" (he meant
recourse) "which will probably terminate in--in bringing _you_ to a
sense of the unwisdom, of the--the foolishness which seems to guide and
