Here the opposing sides of the glen, approaching each other and becoming
clothed with brushwood and stunted oaks, formed a wooded ravine, at the
bottom of which ran the mill-stream, in broken, unquiet course,
struggling with many stones, chafing against rugged banks, fretting with
gnarled tree-roots, foaming, gurgling, battling as it went. Here, when
you had wandered half a mile from the mill, you found a sense of deep
solitude--found it in the shade of unmolested trees, received it in the
singing of many birds, for which that shade made a home. This was no
trodden way. The freshness of the wood flowers attested that foot of man
seldom pressed them; the abounding wild roses looked as if they budded,
bloomed, and faded under the watch of solitude, as if in a sultan's
harem. Here you saw the sweet azure of blue-bells, and recognized in
pearl-white blossoms, spangling the grass, a humble type of some starlit
spot in space.

Mrs. Pryor liked a quiet walk. She ever shunned high-roads, and sought
byways and lonely lanes. One companion she preferred to total solitude,
for in solitude she was nervous; a vague fear of annoying encounters
broke the enjoyment of quite lonely rambles. But she feared nothing with
Caroline. When once she got away from human habitations, and entered
the still demesne of nature accompanied by this one youthful friend, a
propitious change seemed to steal over her mind and beam in her
countenance. When with Caroline--and Caroline only--her heart, you would
have said, shook off a burden, her brow put aside a veil, her spirits
too escaped from a restraint. With her she was cheerful; with her, at
times, she was tender; to her she would impart her knowledge, reveal
glimpses of her experience, give her opportunities for guessing what
life she had lived, what cultivation her mind had received, of what
calibre was her intelligence, how and where her feelings were
vulnerable.

To-day, for instance, as they walked along, Mrs. Pryor talked to her
companion about the various birds singing in the trees, discriminated
their species, and said something about their habits and peculiarities.
English natural history seemed familiar to her. All the wild flowers
round their path were recognized by her; tiny plants springing near
stones and peeping out of chinks in old walls--plants such as Caroline
had scarcely noticed before--received a name and an intimation of their
properties. It appeared that she had minutely studied the botany of
English fields and woods. Having reached the head of the ravine, they
sat down together on a ledge of gray and mossy rock jutting from the
base of a steep green hill which towered above them. She looked round
her, and spoke of the neighbourhood as she had once before seen it long
ago. She alluded to its changes, and compared its aspect with that of
other parts of England, revealing in quiet, unconscious touches of
description a sense of the picturesque, an appreciation of the beautiful
or commonplace, a power of comparing the wild with the cultured, the
grand with the tame, that gave to her discourse a graphic charm as
pleasant as it was unpretending.

The sort of reverent pleasure with which Caroline listened--so sincere,
so quiet, yet so evident--stirred the elder lady's faculties to gentle
animation. Rarely, probably, had she, with her chill, repellent outside,
her diffident mien, and incommunicative habits, known what it was to
excite in one whom she herself could love feelings of earnest affection
and admiring esteem. Delightful, doubtless, was the consciousness that a
young girl towards whom it seemed, judging by the moved expression of
her eyes and features, her heart turned with almost a fond impulse,
looked up to her as an instructor, and clung to her as a friend. With a
somewhat more marked accent of interest than she often permitted herself
to use, she said, as she bent towards her youthful companion, and put
aside from her forehead a pale brown curl which had strayed from the
confining comb, "I do hope this sweet air blowing from the hill will do
you good, my dear Caroline. I wish I could see something more of colour
in these cheeks; but perhaps you were never florid?"

"I had red cheeks once," returned Miss Helstone, smiling. "I remember a
year--two years ago--when I used to look in the glass, I saw a different
face there to what I see now--rounder and rosier. But when we are
young," added the girl of eighteen, "our minds are careless and our
lives easy."

"Do you," continued Mrs. Pryor, mastering by an effort that tyrant
timidity which made it difficult for her, even under present
circumstances, to attempt the scrutiny of another's heart--"do you, at
your age, fret yourself with cares for the future? Believe me, you had
better not. Let the morrow take thought for the things of itself."

"True, dear madam. It is not over the future I pine. The evil of the day
is sometimes oppressive--too oppressive--and I long to escape it."

"That is--the evil of the day--that is--your uncle perhaps is not--you
find it difficult to understand--he does not appreciate----"

Mrs. Pryor could not complete her broken sentences; she could not manage
to put the question whether Mr. Helstone was too harsh with his niece.
But Caroline comprehended.

"Oh, that is nothing," she replied. "My uncle and I get on very well. We
never quarrel--I don't call him harsh--he never scolds me. Sometimes I
wish somebody in the world loved me, but I cannot say that I
particularly wish him to have more affection for me than he has. As a
child, I should perhaps have felt the want of attention, only the
servants were very kind to me; but when people are long indifferent to
us, we grow indifferent to their indifference. It is my uncle's way not
to care for women and girls, unless they be ladies that he meets in
company. He could not alter, and I have no wish that he should alter, as
far as I am concerned. I believe it would merely annoy and frighten me
were he to be affectionate towards me now. But you know, Mrs. Pryor, it
is scarcely _living_ to measure time as I do at the rectory. The hours
pass, and I get them over somehow, but I do not _live_. I endure
existence, but I rarely enjoy it. Since Miss Keeldar and you came I have
been--I was going to say happier, but that would be untrue." She paused.

"How untrue? You are fond of Miss Keeldar, are you not, my dear?"

"Very fond of Shirley. I both like and admire her. But I am painfully
circumstanced. For a reason I cannot explain I want to go away from this
place, and to forget it."

"You told me before you wished to be a governess; but, my dear, if you
remember, I did not encourage the idea. I have been a governess myself
great part of my life. In Miss Keeldar's acquaintance I esteem myself
most fortunate. Her talents and her really sweet disposition have
rendered my office easy to me; but when I was young, before I married,
my trials were severe, poignant. I should not like a---- I should not
like you to endure similar ones. It was my lot to enter a family of
considerable pretensions to good birth and mental superiority, and the
members of which also believed that 'on them was perceptible' an unusual
endowment of the 'Christian graces;' that all their hearts were
regenerate, and their spirits in a peculiar state of discipline. I was
early given to understand that 'as I was not their equal,' so I could
not expect 'to have their sympathy.' It was in no sort concealed from me
that I was held a 'burden and a restraint in society.' The gentlemen, I
found, regarded me as a 'tabooed woman,' to whom 'they were interdicted
from granting the usual privileges of the sex,' and yet 'who annoyed
them by frequently crossing their path.' The ladies too made it plain
that they thought me 'a bore.' The servants, it was signified, 'detested
me;' _why_, I could never clearly comprehend. My pupils, I was told,
'however much they might love me, and how deep soever the interest I
might take in them, could not be my friends.' It was intimated that I
must 'live alone, and never transgress the invisible but rigid line
which established the difference between me and my employers.' My life
in this house was sedentary, solitary, constrained, joyless, toilsome.
The dreadful crushing of the animal spirits, the ever-prevailing sense
of friendlessness and homelessness consequent on this state of things
began ere long to produce mortal effects on my constitution. I sickened.
The lady of the house told me coolly I was the victim of 'wounded
vanity.' She hinted that if I did not make an effort to quell my
'ungodly discontent,' to cease 'murmuring against God's appointment,'
and to cultivate the profound humility befitting my station, my mind
would very likely 'go to pieces' on the rock that wrecked most of my
sisterhood--morbid self-esteem--and that I should die an inmate of a
lunatic asylum.

"I said nothing to Mrs. Hardman--it would have been useless; but to her
eldest daughter I one day dropped a few observations, which were
answered thus. There were hardships, she allowed, in the position of a
governess. 'Doubtless they had their trials; but,' she averred, with a
manner it makes me smile now to recall--'but it must be so. _She_' (Miss
H.) 'had neither view, hope, nor _wish_ to see these things remedied;
for in the inherent constitution of English habits, feelings, and
prejudices there was no possibility that they should be. Governesses,'
she observed, 'must ever be kept in a sort of isolation. It is the only
means of maintaining that distance which the reserve of English manners
and the decorum of English families exact.'

"I remember I sighed as Miss Hardman quitted my bedside. She caught the
sound, and turning, said severely, 'I fear, Miss Grey, you have
inherited in fullest measure the worst sin of our fallen nature--the sin
of pride. You are proud, and therefore you are ungrateful too. Mamma
pays you a handsome salary, and if you had average sense you would
thankfully put up with much that is fatiguing to do and irksome to bear,
since it is so well made worth your while.'

"Miss Hardman, my love, was a very strong-minded young lady, of most
distinguished talents. The aristocracy are decidedly a very superior
class, you know, both physically, and morally, and mentally; as a high
Tory I acknowledge that. I could not describe the dignity of her voice
and mien as she addressed me thus; still, I fear she was selfish, my
dear. I would never wish to speak ill of my superiors in rank, but I
think she was a little selfish."

"I remember," continued Mrs. Pryor, after a pause, "another of Miss H.'s
observations, which she would utter with quite a grand air. 'WE,' she
would say--'WE need the imprudences, extravagances, mistakes, and crimes
of a certain number of fathers to sow the seed from which WE reap the
harvest of governesses. The daughters of trades-people, however well
educated, must necessarily be underbred, and as such unfit to be
inmates of OUR dwellings, or guardians of OUR children's minds and
persons. WE shall ever prefer to place those about OUR offspring who
have been born and bred with somewhat of the same refinement as
OURSELVES.'"

"Miss Hardman must have thought herself something better than her
fellow-creatures, ma'am, since she held that their calamities, and even
crimes, were necessary to minister to her convenience. You say she was
religious. Her religion must have been that of the Pharisee who thanked
God that he was not as other men are, nor even as that publican."

"My dear, we will not discuss the point. I should be the last person to
wish to instil into your mind any feeling of dissatisfaction with your
lot in life, or any sentiment of envy or insubordination towards your
superiors. Implicit submission to authorities, scrupulous deference to
our betters (under which term I, of course, include the higher classes
of society), are, in my opinion, indispensable to the well-being of
every community. All I mean to say, my dear, is that you had better not
attempt to be a governess, as the duties of the position would be too
severe for your constitution. Not one word of disrespect would I breathe
towards either Mrs. or Miss Hardman; only, recalling my own experience,
I cannot but feel that, were you to fall under auspices such as theirs,
you would contend a while courageously with your doom, then you would
pine and grow too weak for your work; you would come home--if you still
had a home--broken down. Those languishing years would follow of which
none but the invalid and her immediate friends feel the heart-sickness
and know the burden. Consumption or decline would close the chapter.
Such is the history of many a life. I would not have it yours. My dear,
we will now walk about a little, if you please."

They both rose, and slowly paced a green natural terrace bordering the
chasm.

"My dear," ere long again began Mrs. Pryor, a sort of timid, embarrassed
abruptness marking her manner as she spoke, "the young, especially those
to whom nature has been favourable, often--frequently--anticipate--look
forward to--to marriage as the end, the goal of their hopes."

And she stopped. Caroline came to her relief with promptitude, showing a
great deal more self-possession and courage than herself on the
formidable topic now broached.

"They do, and naturally," she replied, with a calm emphasis that
startled Mrs. Pryor. "They look forward to marriage with some one they
love as the brightest, the only bright destiny that can await them. Are
they wrong?"

"Oh, my dear!" exclaimed Mrs. Pryor, clasping her hands; and again she
paused. Caroline turned a searching, an eager eye on the face of her
friend: that face was much agitated. "My dear," she murmured, "life is
an illusion."

"But not love! Love is real--the most real, the most lasting, the
sweetest and yet the bitterest thing we know."

"My dear, it is very bitter. It is said to be strong--strong as death!
Most of the cheats of existence are strong. As to their sweetness,
nothing is so transitory; its date is a moment, the twinkling of an eye.
The sting remains for ever. It may perish with the dawn of eternity, but
it tortures through time into its deepest night."

"Yes, it tortures through time," agreed Caroline, "except when it is
mutual love."

"Mutual love! My dear, romances are pernicious. You do not read them, I
hope?"

"Sometimes--whenever I can get them, indeed. But romance-writers might
know nothing of love, judging by the way in which they treat of it."

"Nothing whatever, my dear," assented Mrs. Pryor eagerly, "nor of
marriage; and the false pictures they give of those subjects cannot be
too strongly condemned. They are not like reality. They show you only
the green, tempting surface of the marsh, and give not one faithful or
truthful hint of the slough underneath."

"But it is not always slough," objected Caroline. "There are happy
marriages. Where affection is reciprocal and sincere, and minds are
harmonious, marriage _must_ be happy."

"It is never wholly happy. Two people can never literally be as one.
There is, perhaps, a possibility of content under peculiar
circumstances, such as are seldom combined; but it is as well not to run
the risk--you may make fatal mistakes. Be satisfied, my dear. Let all
the single be satisfied with their freedom."

"You echo my uncle's words!" exclaimed Caroline, in a tone of dismay.
"You speak like Mrs. Yorke in her most gloomy moments, like Miss Mann
when she is most sourly and hypochondriacally disposed. This is
terrible!"

"No, it is only true. O child, you have only lived the pleasant morning
time of life; the hot, weary noon, the sad evening, the sunless night,
are yet to come for you. Mr. Helstone, you say, talks as I talk; and I
wonder how Mrs. Matthewson Helstone would have talked had she been
living. She died! she died!"

"And, alas! my own mother and father----" exclaimed Caroline, struck by
a sombre recollection.

"What of them?"

"Did I never tell you that they were separated?"

"I have heard it."

"They must, then, have been very miserable."

"You see all _facts_ go to prove what I say."

"In this case there ought to be no such thing as marriage."

"There ought, my dear, were it only to prove that this life is a mere
state of probation, wherein neither rest nor recompense is to be
vouchsafed."

"But your own marriage, Mrs. Pryor?"

Mrs. Pryor shrank and shuddered as if a rude finger had pressed a naked
nerve. Caroline felt she had touched what would not bear the slightest
contact.

"My marriage was unhappy," said the lady, summoning courage at last;
"but yet----" She hesitated.

"But yet," suggested Caroline, "not immitigably wretched?"

"Not in its results, at least. No," she added, in a softer tone; "God
mingles something of the balm of mercy even in vials of the most
corrosive woe. He can so turn events that from the very same blind, rash
act whence sprang the curse of half our life may flow the blessing of
the remainder. Then I am of a peculiar disposition--I own that--far from
facile, without address, in some points eccentric. I ought never to have
married. Mine is not the nature easily to find a duplicate or likely to
assimilate with a contrast. I was quite aware of my own ineligibility;
and if I had not been so miserable as a governess, I never should have
married; and then----"

Caroline's eyes asked her to proceed. They entreated her to break the
thick cloud of despair which her previous words had seemed to spread
over life.

"And then, my dear, Mr.--that is, the gentleman I married--was, perhaps,
rather an exceptional than an average character. I hope, at least, the
experience of few has been such as mine was, or that few have felt their
sufferings as I felt mine. They nearly shook my mind; relief was so
hopeless, redress so unattainable. But, my dear, I do not wish to
dishearten; I only wish to warn you, and to prove that the single should
not be too anxious to change their state, as they may change for the
worse."

"Thank you, my dear madam. I quite understand your kind intentions, but
there is no fear of my falling into the error to which you allude. I, at
least, have no thoughts of marriage, and for that reason I want to make
myself a position by some other means."

"My dear, listen to me. On what I am going to say I have carefully
deliberated, having, indeed, revolved the subject in my thoughts ever
since you first mentioned your wish to obtain a situation. You know I at
present reside with Miss Keeldar in the capacity of companion. Should
she marry (and that she _will_ marry ere long many circumstances induce
me to conclude), I shall cease to be necessary to her in that capacity.
I must tell you that I possess a small independency, arising partly from
my own savings, and partly from a legacy left me some years since.
Whenever I leave Fieldhead I shall take a house of my own. I could not
endure to live in solitude. I have no relations whom I care to invite to
close intimacy; for, as you must have observed, and as I have already
avowed, my habits and tastes have their peculiarities. To you, my dear,
I need not say I am attached; with you I am happier than I have ever
been with any living thing" (this was said with marked emphasis). "Your
society I should esteem a very dear privilege--an inestimable privilege,
a comfort, a blessing. You shall come to me, then. Caroline, do you
refuse me? I hope you can love me?"

And with these two abrupt questions she stopped.

"Indeed, I _do_ love you," was the reply. "I should like to live with
you. But you are too kind."

"All I have," went on Mrs. Pryor, "I would leave to you. You should be
provided for. But never again say I am _too kind_. You pierce my heart,
child!"

"But, my dear madam--this generosity--I have no claim----"

"Hush! you must not talk about it. There are some things we cannot bear
to hear. Oh! it is late to begin, but I may yet live a few years. I can
never wipe out the past, but perhaps a brief space in the future may
yet be mine."

Mrs. Pryor seemed deeply agitated. Large tears trembled in her eyes and
rolled down her cheeks. Caroline kissed her, in her gentle, caressing
way, saying softly, "I love you dearly. Don't cry."

But the lady's whole frame seemed shaken. She sat down, bent her head to
her knee, and wept aloud. Nothing could console her till the inward
storm had had its way. At last the agony subsided of itself.

"Poor thing!" she murmured, returning Caroline's kiss, "poor lonely
lamb! But come," she added abruptly--"come; we must go home."

For a short distance Mrs. Pryor walked very fast. By degrees, however,
she calmed down to her wonted manner, fell into her usual characteristic
pace--a peculiar one, like all her movements--and by the time they
reached Fieldhead she had re-entered into herself. The outside was, as
usual, still and shy.




CHAPTER XXII.

TWO LIVES.


Only half of Moore's activity and resolution had been seen in his
defence of the mill; he showed the other half (and a terrible half it
was) in the indefatigable, the relentless assiduity with which he
pursued the leaders of the riot. The mob, the mere followers, he let
alone. Perhaps an innate sense of justice told him that men misled by
false counsel and goaded by privations are not fit objects of vengeance,
and that he who would visit an even violent act on the bent head of
suffering is a tyrant, not a judge. At all events, though he knew many
of the number, having recognized them during the latter part of the
attack when day began to dawn, he let them daily pass him on street and
road without notice or threat.

The leaders he did not know. They were strangers--emissaries from the
large towns. Most of these were not members of the operative class. They
were chiefly "down-draughts," bankrupts, men always in debt and often in
drink, men who had nothing to lose, and much, in the way of character,
cash, and cleanliness, to gain. These persons Moore hunted like any
sleuth-hound, and well he liked the occupation. Its excitement was of a
kind pleasant to his nature. He liked it better than making cloth.

His horse must have hated these times, for it was ridden both hard and
often. He almost lived on the road, and the fresh air was as welcome to
his lungs as the policeman's quest to his mood; he preferred it to the
steam of dye-houses. The magistrates of the district must have dreaded
him. They were slow, timid men; he liked both to frighten and to rouse
them. He liked to force them to betray a certain fear, which made them
alike falter in resolve and recoil in action--the fear, simply, of
assassination. This, indeed, was the dread which had hitherto hampered
every manufacturer and almost every public man in the district. Helstone
alone had ever repelled it. The old Cossack knew well he might be shot.
He knew there was risk; but such death had for his nerves no terrors. It
would have been his chosen, might he have had a choice.

Moore likewise knew his danger. The result was an unquenchable scorn of
the quarter whence such danger was to be apprehended. The consciousness
that he hunted assassins was the spur in his high-mettled temper's
flank. As for fear, he was too proud, too hard-natured (if you will),
too phlegmatic a man to fear. Many a time he rode belated over the
moors, moonlit or moonless as the case might be, with feelings far more
elate, faculties far better refreshed, than when safety and stagnation
environed him in the counting-house. Four was the number of the leaders
to be accounted for. Two, in the course of a fortnight, were brought to
bay near Stilbro'; the remaining two it was necessary to seek farther
off. Their haunts were supposed to lie near Birmingham.

Meantime the clothier did not neglect his battered mill. Its reparation
was esteemed a light task, carpenters' and glaziers' work alone being
needed. The rioters not having succeeded in effecting an entrance, his
grim metal darlings--the machines--had escaped damage.

Whether during this busy life--whether while stern justice and exacting
business claimed his energies and harassed his thoughts--he now and then
gave one moment, dedicated one effort, to keep alive gentler fires than
those which smoulder in the fane of Nemesis, it was not easy to
discover. He seldom went near Fieldhead; if he did, his visits were
brief. If he called at the rectory, it was only to hold conferences with
the rector in his study. He maintained his rigid course very steadily.
Meantime the history of the year continued troubled. There was no lull
in the tempest of war; her long hurricane still swept the Continent.
There was not the faintest sign of serene weather, no opening amid "the
clouds of battle-dust and smoke," no fall of pure dews genial to the
olive, no cessation of the red rain which nourishes the baleful and
glorious laurel. Meantime, Ruin had her sappers and miners at work under
Moore's feet, and whether he rode or walked, whether he only crossed his
counting-house hearth or galloped over sullen Rushedge, he was aware of
a hollow echo, and felt the ground shake to his tread.

While the summer thus passed with Moore, how did it lapse with Shirley
and Caroline? Let us first visit the heiress. How does she look? Like a
love-lorn maiden, pale and pining for a neglectful swain? Does she sit
the day long bent over some sedentary task? Has she for ever a book in
her hand, or sewing on her knee, and eyes only for that, and words for
nothing, and thoughts unspoken?

By no means. Shirley is all right. If her wistful cast of physiognomy is
not gone, no more is her careless smile. She keeps her dark old
manor-house light and bright with her cheery presence. The gallery and
the low-ceiled chambers that open into it have learned lively echoes
from her voice; the dim entrance-hall, with its one window, has grown
pleasantly accustomed to the frequent rustle of a silk dress, as its
wearer sweeps across from room to room, now carrying flowers to the
barbarous peach-bloom salon, now entering the dining-room to open its
casements and let in the scent of mignonette and sweet-briar, anon
bringing plants from the staircase window to place in the sun at the
open porch door.

She takes her sewing occasionally; but, by some fatality, she is doomed
never to sit steadily at it for above five minutes at a time. Her
thimble is scarcely fitted on, her needle scarce threaded, when a sudden
thought calls her upstairs. Perhaps she goes to seek some
just-then-remembered old ivory-backed needle-book or older china-topped
work-box, quite unneeded, but which seems at the moment indispensable;
perhaps to arrange her hair, or a drawer which she recollects to have
seen that morning in a state of curious confusion; perhaps only to take
a peep from a particular window at a particular view, whence Briarfield
church and rectory are visible, pleasantly bowered in trees. She has
scarcely returned, and again taken up the slip of cambric or square of
half-wrought canvas, when Tartar's bold scrape and strangled whistle are
heard at the porch door, and she must run to open it for him. It is a
hot day; he comes in panting; she must convoy him to the kitchen, and
see with her own eyes that his water-bowl is replenished. Through the
open kitchen door the court is visible, all sunny and gay, and people
with turkeys and their poults, peahens and their chicks, pearl-flecked
Guinea-fowls, and a bright variety of pure white, and purple-necked, and
blue and cinnamon plumed pigeons. Irresistible spectacle to Shirley! She
runs to the pantry for a roll, and she stands on the door step
scattering crumbs. Around her throng her eager, plump, happy feathered
vassals John is about the stables, and John must be talked to, and her
mare looked at. She is still petting and patting it when the cows come
in to be milked. This is important; Shirley must stay and take a review
of them all. There are perhaps some little calves, some little
new-yeaned lambs--it may be twins, whose mothers have rejected them.
Miss Keeldar must be introduced to them by John, must permit herself the
treat of feeding them with her own hand, under the direction of her
careful foreman. Meantime John moots doubtful questions about the
farming of certain "crofts," and "ings," and "holmes," and his mistress
is necessitated to fetch her garden-hat--a gipsy straw--and accompany
him, over stile and along hedgerow, to hear the conclusion of the whole
agricultural matter on the spot, and with the said "crofts," "ings," and
"holms" under her eye. Bright afternoon thus wears into soft evening,
and she comes home to a late tea, and after tea she never sews.

After tea Shirley reads, and she is just about as tenacious of her book
as she is lax of her needle. Her study is the rug, her seat a footstool,
or perhaps only the carpet at Mrs. Pryor's feet: there she always
learned her lessons when a child, and old habits have a strong power
over her. The tawny and lionlike bulk of Tartar is ever stretched beside
her, his negro muzzle laid on his fore paws--straight, strong, and
shapely as the limbs of an Alpine wolf. One hand of the mistress
generally reposes on the loving serf's rude head, because if she takes
it away he groans and is discontented. Shirley's mind is given to her
book. She lifts not her eyes; she neither stirs nor speaks--unless,
indeed, it be to return a brief respectful answer to Mrs. Pryor, who
addresses deprecatory phrases to her now and then.

"My dear, you had better not have that great dog so near you; he is
crushing the border of your dress."

"Oh, it is only muslin. I can put a clean one on to-morrow."

"My dear, I wish you could acquire the habit of sitting to a table when
you read."

"I will try, ma'am, some time; but it is so comfortable to do as one has
always been accustomed to do."

"My dear, let me beg of you to put that book down. You are trying your
eyes by the doubtful firelight."

"No, ma'am, not at all; my eyes are never tired."

At last, however, a pale light falls on the page from the window. She
looks; the moon is up. She closes the volume, rises, and walks through
the room. Her book has perhaps been a good one; it has refreshed,
refilled, rewarmed her heart; it has set her brain astir, furnished her
mind with pictures. The still parlour, the clean hearth, the window
opening on the twilight sky, and showing its "sweet regent," new throned
and glorious, suffice to make earth an Eden, life a poem, for Shirley. A
still, deep, inborn delight glows in her young veins, unmingled,
untroubled, not to be reached or ravished by human agency, because by no
human agency bestowed--the pure gift of God to His creature, the free
dower of Nature to her child. This joy gives her experience of a
genii-life. Buoyant, by green steps, by glad hills, all verdure and
light, she reaches a station scarcely lower than that whence angels
looked down on the dreamer of Bethel, and her eye seeks, and her soul
possesses, the vision of life as she wishes it. No, not as she wishes
it; she has not time to wish. The swift glory spreads out, sweeping and
kindling, and multiplies its splendours faster than Thought can effect
his combinations, faster than Aspiration can utter her longings. Shirley
says nothing while the trance is upon her--she is quite mute; but if
Mrs. Pryor speaks to her now, she goes out quietly, and continues her
walk upstairs in the dim gallery.

If Shirley were not an indolent, a reckless, an ignorant being, she
would take a pen at such moments, or at least while the recollection of
such moments was yet fresh on her spirit. She would seize, she would fix
the apparition, tell the vision revealed. Had she a little more of the
organ of acquisitiveness in her head, a little more of the love of
property in her nature, she would take a good-sized sheet of paper and
write plainly out, in her own queer but clear and legible hand, the
story that has been narrated, the song that has been sung to her, and
thus possess what she was enabled to create. But indolent she is,
reckless she is, and most ignorant; for she does not know her dreams are
rare, her feelings peculiar. She does not know, has never known, and
will die without knowing, the full value of that spring whose bright
fresh bubbling in her heart keeps it green.

Shirley takes life easily. Is not that fact written in her eye? In her
good-tempered moments is it not as full of lazy softness as in her brief
fits of anger it is fulgent with quick-flashing fire? Her nature is in
her eye. So long as she is calm, indolence, indulgence, humour, and
tenderness possess that large gray sphere; incense her, a red ray
pierces the dew, it quickens instantly to flame.

Ere the month of July was past, Miss Keeldar would probably have started
with Caroline on that northern tour they had planned; but just at that
epoch an invasion befell Fieldhead. A genteel foraging party besieged
Shirley in her castle, and compelled her to surrender at discretion. An
uncle, an aunt, and two cousins from the south--a Mr., Mrs., and two
Misses Sympson, of Sympson Grove, ----shire--came down upon her in
state. The laws of hospitality obliged her to give in, which she did
with a facility which somewhat surprised Caroline, who knew her to be
prompt in action and fertile in expedient where a victory was to be
gained for her will. Miss Helstone even asked her how it was she
submitted so readily. She answered, old feelings had their power; she
had passed two years of her early youth at Sympson Grove.

"How did she like her relatives?"

She had nothing in common with them, she replied. Little Harry Sympson,
indeed, the sole son of the family, was very unlike his sisters, and of
him she had formerly been fond; but he was not coming to Yorkshire--at
least not yet.

The next Sunday the Fieldhead pew in Briarfield Church appeared peopled
with a prim, trim, fidgety, elderly gentleman, who shifted his
spectacles, and changed his position every three minutes; a patient,
placid-looking elderly lady in brown satin; and two pattern young
ladies, in pattern attire, with pattern deportment. Shirley had the air
of a black swan or a white crow in the midst of this party, and very
forlorn was her aspect. Having brought her into respectable society, we
will leave her there a while, and look after Miss Helstone.

Separated from Miss Keeldar for the present, as she could not seek her
in the midst of her fine relatives, scared away from Fieldhead by the
visiting commotion which the new arrivals occasioned in the
neighbourhood, Caroline was limited once more to the gray rectory, the
solitary morning walk in remote by-paths, the long, lonely afternoon
sitting in a quiet parlour which the sun forsook at noon, or in the
garden alcove where it shone bright, yet sad, on the ripening red
currants trained over the trellis, and on the fair monthly roses
entwined between, and through them fell chequered on Caroline sitting in
her white summer dress, still as a garden statue. There she read old
books, taken from her uncle's library. The Greek and Latin were of no
use to her, and its collection of light literature was chiefly contained
on a shelf which had belonged to her aunt Mary--some venerable Lady's
Magazines, that had once performed a sea-voyage with their owner, and
undergone a storm, and whose pages were stained with salt water; some
mad Methodist Magazines, full of miracles and apparitions, of
preternatural warnings, ominous dreams, and frenzied fanaticism; the
equally mad letters of Mrs. Elizabeth Rowe from the Dead to the Living;
a few old English classics. From these faded flowers Caroline had in her
childhood extracted the honey; they were tasteless to her now. By way of
change, and also of doing good, she would sew--make garments for the
poor, according to good Miss Ainley's direction. Sometimes, as she felt
and saw her tears fall slowly on her work, she would wonder how the
excellent woman who had cut it out and arranged it for her managed to be
so equably serene in _her_ solitude.

"I never find Miss Ainley oppressed with despondency or lost in grief,"
she thought; "yet her cottage is a still, dim little place, and she is
without a bright hope or near friend in the world. I remember, though,
she told me once she had tutored her thoughts to tend upwards to heaven.
She allowed there was, and ever had been, little enjoyment in this world
for her, and she looks, I suppose, to the bliss of the world to come. So
do nuns, with their close cell, their iron lamp, their robe strait as a
shroud, their bed narrow as a coffin. She says often she has no fear of
death--no dread of the grave; no more, doubtless, had St. Simeon
Stylites, lifted up terrible on his wild column in the wilderness; no
more has the Hindu votary stretched on his couch of iron spikes. Both
these having violated nature, their natural likings and antipathies are
reversed; they grow altogether morbid. I do fear death as yet, but I
believe it is because I am young. Poor Miss Ainley would cling closer to
life if life had more charms for her. God surely did not create us and
cause us to live with the sole end of wishing always to die. I believe
in my heart we were intended to prize life and enjoy it so long as we
retain it. Existence never was originally meant to be that useless,
blank, pale, slow-trailing thing it often becomes to many, and is
becoming to me among the rest.

"Nobody," she went on--"nobody in particular is to blame, that I can
see, for the state in which things are; and I cannot tell, however much
I puzzle over it, how they are to be altered for the better; but I feel
there is something wrong somewhere. I believe single women should have
more to do--better chances of interesting and profitable occupation than
they possess now. And when I speak thus I have no impression that I
displease God by my words; that I am either impious or impatient,
irreligious or sacrilegious. My consolation is, indeed, that God hears
many a groan, and compassionates much grief which man stops his ears
against, or frowns on with impotent contempt. I say _impotent_, for I
observe that to such grievances as society cannot readily cure it
usually forbids utterance, on pain of its scorn, this scorn being only a
sort of tinselled cloak to its deformed weakness. People hate to be
reminded of ills they are unable or unwilling to remedy. Such reminder,
in forcing on them a sense of their own incapacity, or a more painful
sense of an obligation to make some unpleasant effort, troubles their
ease and shakes their self-complacency. Old maids, like the houseless
and unemployed poor, should not ask for a place and an occupation in the
world; the demand disturbs the happy and rich--it disturbs parents. Look
at the numerous families of girls in this neighbourhood--the Armitages,
the Birtwhistles, the Sykeses. The brothers of these girls are every one
in business or in professions; they have something to do. Their sisters
have no earthly employment but household work and sewing, no earthly
pleasure but an unprofitable visiting, and no hope, in all their life to
come, of anything better. This stagnant state of things makes them
decline in health. They are never well, and their minds and views shrink
to wondrous narrowness. The great wish, the sole aim of every one of
them is to be married, but the majority will never marry; they will die
as they now live. They scheme, they plot, they dress to ensnare
husbands. The gentlemen turn them into ridicule; they don't want them;
they hold them very cheap. They say--I have heard them say it with
sneering laughs many a time--the matrimonial market is overstocked.
Fathers say so likewise, and are angry with their daughters when they
observe their manœuvres--they order them to stay at home. What do they
expect them to do at home? If you ask, they would answer, sew and cook.
They expect them to do this, and this only, contentedly, regularly,
uncomplainingly, all their lives long, as if they had no germs of
faculties for anything else--a doctrine as reasonable to hold as it
would be that the fathers have no faculties but for eating what their
daughters cook or for wearing what they sew. Could men live so
themselves? Would they not be very weary? And when there came no relief
to their weariness, but only reproaches at its slightest manifestation,
would not their weariness ferment it time to frenzy? Lucretia, spinning
at midnight in the midst of her maidens, and Solomon's virtuous woman
are often quoted as patterns of what 'the sex,' as they say, ought to
be. I don't know. Lucretia, I dare say, was a most worthy sort of
person, much like my cousin Hortense Moore; but she kept her servants up
very late. I should not have liked to be amongst the number of the
maidens. Hortense would just work me and Sarah in that fashion, if she
could, and neither of us would bear it. The 'virtuous woman,' again, had
her household up in the very middle of the night; she 'got breakfast
over,' as Mrs. Sykes says, before one o'clock a.m.; but _she_ had
something more to do than spin and give out portions. She was a
manufacturer--she made fine linen and sold it; she was an
agriculturist--she bought estates and planted vineyards. _That_ woman
was a manager. She was what the matrons hereabouts call 'a clever
woman.' On the whole, I like her a good deal better than Lucretia; but I
don't believe either Mr. Armitage or Mr. Sykes could have got the
advantage of her in a bargain. Yet I like her. 'Strength and honour were
her clothing; the heart of her husband safely trusted in her. She opened
her mouth with wisdom; in her tongue was the law of kindness; her
children rose up and called her blessed; her husband also praised her.'
King of Israel! your model of a woman is a worthy model! But are we, in
these days, brought up to be like her? Men of Yorkshire! do your
daughters reach this royal standard? Can they reach it? Can you help
them to reach it? Can you give them a field in which their faculties may
be exercised and grow? Men of England! look at your poor girls, many of
them fading around you, dropping off in consumption or decline; or, what
is worse, degenerating to sour old maids--envious, back-biting,
wretched, because life is a desert to them; or, what is worst of all,
reduced to strive, by scarce modest coquetry and debasing artifice, to
gain that position and consideration by marriage which to celibacy is
denied. Fathers! cannot you alter these things? Perhaps not all at once;
but consider the matter well when it is brought before you, receive it
as a theme worthy of thought; do not dismiss it with an idle jest or an
unmanly insult. You would wish to be proud of your daughters, and not to
blush for them; then seek for them an interest and an occupation which
shall raise them above the flirt, the manœuvrer, the mischief-making
tale-bearer. Keep your girls' minds narrow and fettered; they will still
be a plague and a care, sometimes a disgrace to you. Cultivate
them--give them scope and work; they will be your gayest companions in
health, your tenderest nurses in sickness, your most faithful prop in
age."




CHAPTER XXIII.

AN EVENING OUT.


One fine summer day that Caroline had spent entirely alone (her uncle
being at Whinbury), and whose long, bright, noiseless, breezeless,
cloudless hours (how many they seemed since sunrise!) had been to her as
desolate as if they had gone over her head in the shadowless and
trackless wastes of Sahara, instead of in the blooming garden of an
English home, she was sitting in the alcove--her task of work on her
knee, her fingers assiduously plying the needle, her eyes following and
regulating their movements, her brain working restlessly--when Fanny
came to the door, looked round over the lawn and borders, and not seeing
her whom she sought, called out, "Miss Caroline!"

A low voice answered "Fanny!" It issued from the alcove, and thither
Fanny hastened, a note in her hand, which she delivered to fingers that
hardly seemed to have nerve to hold it. Miss Helstone did not ask whence
it came, and she did not look at it; she let it drop amongst the folds
of her work.

"Joe Scott's son, Harry, brought it," said Fanny.

The girl was no enchantress, and knew no magic spell; yet what she said
took almost magical effect on her young mistress. She lifted her head
with the quick motion of revived sensation; she shot, not a languid, but
a lifelike, questioning glance at Fanny.

"Harry Scott! who sent him?"

"He came from the Hollow."

The dropped note was snatched up eagerly, the seal was broken--it was
read in two seconds. An affectionate billet from Hortense, informing her
young cousin that she was returned from Wormwood Wells; that she was
alone to-day, as Robert was gone to Whinbury market; that nothing would
give her greater pleasure than to have Caroline's company to tea, and
the good lady added, she was quite sure such a change would be most
acceptable and beneficial to Caroline, who must be sadly at a loss both
for safe guidance and improving society since the misunderstanding
between Robert and Mr. Helstone had occasioned a separation from her
"meilleure amie, Hortense Gérard Moore." In a postscript she was urged
to put on her bonnet and run down directly.

Caroline did not need the injunction. Glad was she to lay by the brown
holland child's slip she was trimming with braid for the Jew's basket,
to hasten upstairs, cover her curls with her straw bonnet, and throw
round her shoulders the black silk scarf, whose simple drapery suited as
well her shape as its dark hue set off the purity of her dress and the
fairness of her face; glad was she to escape for a few hours the
solitude, the sadness, the nightmare of her life; glad to run down the
green lane sloping to the Hollow, to scent the fragrance of hedge
flowers sweeter than the perfume of moss-rose or lily. True, she knew
Robert was not at the cottage; but it was delight to go where he had
lately been. So long, so totally separated from him, merely to see his
home, to enter the room where he had that morning sat, felt like a
reunion. As such it revived her; and then Illusion was again following
her in Peri mask. The soft agitation of wings caressed her cheek, and
the air, breathing from the blue summer sky, bore a voice which
whispered, "Robert may come home while you are in his house, and then,
at least, you may look in his face--at least you may give him your hand;
perhaps, for a minute, you may sit beside him."

"Silence!" was her austere response; but she loved the comforter and the
consolation.

Miss Moore probably caught from the window the gleam and flutter of
Caroline's white attire through the branchy garden shrubs, for she
advanced from the cottage porch to meet her. Straight, unbending,
phlegmatic as usual, she came on. No haste or ecstasy was ever permitted
to disorder the dignity of _her_ movements; but she smiled, well pleased
to mark the delight of her pupil, to feel her kiss and the gentle,
genial strain of her embrace. She led her tenderly in, half deceived and
wholly flattered. Half deceived! had it not been so she would in all
probability have put her to the wicket, and shut her out. Had she known
clearly to whose account the chief share of this childlike joy was to be
placed, Hortense would most likely have felt both shocked and incensed.
Sisters do not like young ladies to fall in love with their brothers.
It seems, if not presumptuous, silly, weak, a delusion, an absurd
mistake. _They_ do not love these gentlemen--whatever sisterly affection
they may cherish towards them--and that others should, repels them with
a sense of crude romance. The first movement, in short, excited by such
discovery (as with many parents on finding their children to be in love)
is one of mixed impatience and contempt. Reason--if they be rational
people--corrects the false feeling in time; but if they be irrational,
it is never corrected, and the daughter or sister-in-law is disliked to
the end.

"You would expect to find me alone, from what I said in my note,"
observed Miss Moore, as she conducted Caroline towards the parlour; "but
it was written this morning: since dinner, company has come in."

And opening the door she made visible an ample spread of crimson skirts
overflowing the elbow-chair at the fireside, and above them, presiding
with dignity, a cap more awful than a crown. That cap had never come to
the cottage under a bonnet; no, it had been brought in a vast bag, or
rather a middle-sized balloon of black silk, held wide with whalebone.
The screed, or frill of the cap, stood a quarter of a yard broad round
the face of the wearer. The ribbon, flourishing in puffs and bows about
the head, was of the sort called love-ribbon. There was a good deal of
it, I may say, a very great deal. Mrs. Yorke wore the cap--it became
her; she wore the gown also--it suited her no less.

That great lady was come in a friendly way to take tea with Miss Moore.
It was almost as great and as rare a favour as if the queen were to go
uninvited to share pot-luck with one of her subjects. A higher mark of
distinction she could not show--she who in general scorned visiting and
tea-drinking, and held cheap and stigmatized as "gossips" every maid and
matron of the vicinage.

There was no mistake, however; Miss Moore _was_ a favourite with her.
She had evinced the fact more than once--evinced it by stopping to speak
to her in the churchyard on Sundays; by inviting her, almost hospitably,
to come to Briarmains; evinced it to-day by the grand condescension of a
personal visit. Her reasons for the preference, as assigned by herself,
were that Miss Moore was a woman of steady deportment, without the least
levity of conversation or carriage; also that, being a foreigner, she
must feel the want of a friend to countenance her. She might have added
that her plain aspect, homely, precise dress, and phlegmatic,
unattractive manner were to her so many additional recommendations. It
is certain, at least, that ladies remarkable for the opposite qualities
of beauty, lively bearing, and elegant taste in attire were not often
favoured with her approbation. Whatever gentlemen are apt to admire in
women, Mrs. Yorke condemned; and what they overlook or despise, she
patronized.

Caroline advanced to the mighty matron with some sense of diffidence.
She knew little of Mrs. Yorke, and, as a parson's niece, was doubtful
what sort of a reception she might get. She got a very cool one, and was
glad to hide her discomfiture by turning away to take off her bonnet.
Nor, upon sitting down, was she displeased to be immediately accosted by
a little personage in a blue frock and sash, who started up like some
fairy from the side of the great dame's chair, where she had been
sitting on a footstool, screened from view by the folds of the wide red
gown, and running to Miss Helstone, unceremoniously threw her arms round
her neck and demanded a kiss.

"My mother is not civil to you," said the petitioner, as she received
and repaid a smiling salute, "and Rose there takes no notice of you; it
is their way. If, instead of you, a white angel, with a crown of stars,
had come into the room, mother would nod stiffly, and Rose never lift
her head at all; but I will be your friend--I have always liked you."

"Jessie, curb that tongue of yours, and repress your forwardness!" said
Mrs. Yorke.

"But, mother, you are so frozen!" expostulated Jessie. "Miss Helstone
has never done you any harm; why can't you be kind to her? You sit so
stiff, and look so cold, and speak so dry--what for? That's just the
fashion in which you treat Miss Shirley Keeldar and every other young
lady who comes to our house. And Rose there is such an aut--aut--I have
forgotten the word, but it means a machine in the shape of a human
being. However, between you, you will drive every soul away from
Briarmains; Martin often says so."

"I am an automaton? Good! Let me alone, then," said Rose, speaking from
a corner where she was sitting on the carpet at the foot of a bookcase,
with a volume spread open on her knee.--"Miss Helstone, how do you do?"
she added, directing a brief glance to the person addressed, and then
again casting down her gray, remarkable eyes on the book and returning
to the study of its pages.

Caroline stole a quiet gaze towards her, dwelling on her young, absorbed
countenance, and observing a certain unconscious movement of the mouth
as she read--a movement full of character. Caroline had tact, and she
had fine instinct. She felt that Rose Yorke was a peculiar child--one of
the unique; she knew how to treat her. Approaching quietly, she knelt on
the carpet at her side, and looked over her little shoulder at her book.
It was a romance of Mrs. Radcliffe's--"The Italian."

Caroline read on with her, making no remark. Presently Rose showed her
the attention of asking, ere she turned the leaf, "Are you ready?"

Caroline only nodded.

"Do you like it?" inquired Rose ere long.

"Long since, when I read it as a child, I was wonderfully taken with
it."

"Why?"

"It seemed to open with such promise--such foreboding of a most strange
tale to be unfolded."

"And in reading it you feel as if you were far away from England--really
in Italy--under another sort of sky--that blue sky of the south which
travellers describe."

"You are sensible of that, Rose?"

"It makes me long to travel, Miss Helstone."

"When you are a woman, perhaps, you may be able to gratify your wish."

"I mean to make a way to do so, if one is not made for me. I cannot live
always in Briarfield. The whole world is not very large compared with
creation. I must see the outside of our own round planet, at least."

"How much of its outside?"

"First this hemisphere where we live; then the other. I am resolved that
my life shall be a life. Not a black trance like the toad's, buried in
marble; nor a long, slow death like yours in Briarfield rectory."

"Like mine! what can you mean, child?"

"Might you not as well be tediously dying as for ever shut up in that
glebe-house--a place that, when I pass it, always reminds me of a
windowed grave? I never see any movement about the door. I never hear a
sound from the wall. I believe smoke never issues from the chimneys.
What do you do there?"

"I sew, I read, I learn lessons."

"Are you happy?"

"Should I be happy wandering alone in strange countries as you wish to
do?"

"Much happier, even if you did nothing but wander. Remember, however,
that I shall have an object in view; but if you only went on and on,
like some enchanted lady in a fairy tale, you might be happier than now.
In a day's wandering you would pass many a hill, wood, and watercourse,
each perpetually altering in aspect as the sun shone out or was
overcast; as the weather was wet or fair, dark or bright. Nothing
changes in Briarfield rectory. The plaster of the parlour ceilings, the
paper on the walls, the curtains, carpets, chairs, are still the same."

"Is change necessary to happiness?"

"Yes."

"Is it synonymous with it?"

"I don't know; but I feel monotony and death to be almost the same."

Here Jessie spoke.

"Isn't she mad?" she asked.

"But, Rose," pursued Caroline, "I fear a wanderer's life, for me at
least, would end like that tale you are reading--in disappointment,
vanity, and vexation of spirit."

"Does 'The Italian' so end?"

"I thought so when I read it."
