
"Better to try all things and find all empty than to try nothing and
leave your life a blank. To do this is to commit the sin of him who
buried his talent in a napkin--despicable sluggard!"

"Rose," observed Mrs. Yorke, "solid satisfaction is only to be realized
by doing one's duty."

"Right, mother! And if my Master has given me ten talents, my duty is to
trade with them, and make them ten talents more. Not in the dust of
household drawers shall the coin be interred. I will _not_ deposit it in
a broken-spouted teapot, and shut it up in a china closet among
tea-things. I will _not_ commit it to your work-table to be smothered in
piles of woollen hose. I will _not_ prison it in the linen press to find
shrouds among the sheets. And least of all, mother" (she got up from the
floor)--"least of all will I hide it in a tureen of cold potatoes, to be
ranged with bread, butter, pastry, and ham on the shelves of the
larder."

She stopped, then went on, "Mother, the Lord who gave each of us our
talents will come home some day, and will demand from all an account.
The teapot, the old stocking-foot, the linen rag, the willow-pattern
tureen will yield up their barren deposit in many a house. Suffer your
daughters, at least, to put their money to the exchangers, that they may
be enabled at the Master's coming to pay Him His own with usury."

"Rose, did you bring your sampler with you, as I told you?"

"Yes, mother."

"Sit down, and do a line of marking."

Rose sat down promptly, and wrought according to orders. After a busy
pause of ten minutes, her mother asked, "Do you think yourself oppressed
now--a victim?"

"No, mother."

"Yet, as far as I understood your tirade, it was a protest against all
womanly and domestic employment."

"You misunderstood it, mother. I should be sorry not to learn to sew.
You do right to teach me, and to make me work."

"Even to the mending of your brothers' stockings and the making of
sheets?"

"Yes."

"Where is the use of ranting and spouting about it, then?"

"Am I to do nothing but that? I will do that, and then I will do more.
Now, mother, I have said my say. I am twelve years old at present, and
not till I am sixteen will I speak again about talents. For four years I
bind myself an industrious apprentice to all you can teach me."

"You see what my daughters are, Miss Helstone," observed Mrs. Yorke;
"how precociously wise in their own conceits! 'I would rather this, I
prefer that'--such is Jessie's cuckoo song; while Rose utters the bolder
cry, 'I _will_, and I will _not_!'"

"I render a reason, mother; besides, if my cry is bold, it is only heard
once in a twelvemonth. About each birthday the spirit moves me to
deliver one oracle respecting my own instruction and management. I utter
it and leave it; it is for you, mother, to listen or not."

"I would advise all young ladies," pursued Mrs. Yorke, "to study the
characters of such children as they chance to meet with before they
marry and have any of their own to consider well how they would like
the responsibility of guiding the careless, the labour of persuading the
stubborn, the constant burden and task of training the best."

"But with love it need not be so very difficult," interposed Caroline.
"Mothers love their children most dearly--almost better than they love
themselves."

"Fine talk! very sentimental! There is the rough, practical part of life
yet to come for you, young miss."

"But, Mrs. Yorke, if I take a little baby into my arms--any poor woman's
infant, for instance--I feel that I love that helpless thing quite
peculiarly, though I am not its mother. I could do almost anything for
it willingly, if it were delivered over entirely to my care--if it were
quite dependent on me."

"You _feel_! Yes, yes! I dare say, now. You are led a great deal by your
_feelings_, and you think yourself a very sensitive personage, no doubt.
Are you aware that, with all these romantic ideas, you have managed to
train your features into an habitually lackadaisical expression, better
suited to a novel-heroine than to a woman who is to make her way in the
real world by dint of common sense?"

"No; I am not at all aware of that, Mrs. Yorke."

"Look in the glass just behind you. Compare the face you see there with
that of any early-rising, hard-working milkmaid."

"My face is a pale one, but it is _not_ sentimental; and most milkmaids,
however red and robust they may be, are more stupid and less practically
fitted to make their way in the world than I am. I think more, and more
correctly, than milkmaids in general do; consequently, where they would
often, for want of reflection, act weakly, I, by dint of reflection,
should act judiciously."

"Oh no! you would be influenced by your feelings; you would be guided by
impulse."

"Of course I should often be influenced by my feelings. They were given
me to that end. Whom my feelings teach me to love I _must_ and _shall_
love; and I hope, if ever I have a husband and children, my feelings
will induce me to love them. I hope, in that case, all my impulses will
be strong in compelling me to love."

Caroline had a pleasure in saying this with emphasis; she had a pleasure
in daring to say it in Mrs. Yorke's presence. She did not care what
unjust sarcasm might be hurled at her in reply. She flushed, not with
anger but excitement, when the ungenial matron answered coolly, "Don't
waste your dramatic effects. That was well said--it was quite fine; but
it is lost on two women--an old wife and an old maid. There should have
been a disengaged gentleman present.--Is Mr. Robert nowhere hid behind
the curtains, do you think, Miss Moore?"

Hortense, who during the chief part of the conversation had been in the
kitchen superintending the preparations for tea, did not yet quite
comprehend the drift of the discourse. She answered, with a puzzled air,
that Robert was at Whinbury. Mrs. Yorke laughed her own peculiar short
laugh.

"Straightforward Miss Moore!" said she patronizingly. "It is like you to
understand my question so literally and answer it so simply. _Your_ mind
comprehends nothing of intrigue. Strange things might go on around you
without your being the wiser; you are not of the class the world calls
sharp-witted."

These equivocal compliments did not seem to please Hortense. She drew
herself up, puckered her black eyebrows, but still looked puzzled.

"I have ever been noted for sagacity and discernment from childhood,"
she returned; for, indeed, on the possession of these qualities she
peculiarly piqued herself.

"You never plotted to win a husband, I'll be bound," pursued Mrs. Yorke;
"and you have not the benefit of previous experience to aid you in
discovering when others plot."

Caroline felt this kind language where the benevolent speaker intended
she should feel it--in her very heart. She could not even parry the
shafts; she was defenceless for the present. To answer would have been
to avow that the cap fitted. Mrs. Yorke, looking at her as she sat with
troubled, downcast eyes, and cheek burning painfully, and figure
expressing in its bent attitude and unconscious tremor all the
humiliation and chagrin she experienced, felt the sufferer was fair
game. The strange woman had a natural antipathy to a shrinking,
sensitive character--a nervous temperament; nor was a pretty, delicate,
and youthful face a passport to her affections. It was seldom she met
with all these obnoxious qualities combined in one individual; still
more seldom she found that individual at her mercy, under circumstances
in which she could crush her well. She happened this afternoon to be
specially bilious and morose--as much disposed to gore as any vicious
"mother of the herd." Lowering her large head she made a new charge.

"Your cousin Hortense is an excellent sister, Miss Helstone. Such ladies
as come to try their life's luck here at Hollow's Cottage may, by a very
little clever female artifice, cajole the mistress of the house, and
have the game all in their own hands. You are fond of your cousin's
society, I dare say, miss?"

"Of which cousin's?"

"Oh, of the lady's, _of course_."

"Hortense is, and always has been, most kind to me."

"Every sister with an eligible single brother is considered most kind by
her spinster friends."

"Mrs. Yorke," said Caroline, lifting her eyes slowly, their blue orbs at
the same time clearing from trouble, and shining steady and full, while
the glow of shame left her cheek, and its hue turned pale and
settled--"Mrs. Yorke, may I ask what you mean?"

"To give you a lesson on the cultivation of rectitude, to disgust you
with craft and false sentiment."

"Do I need this lesson?"

"Most young ladies of the present day need it. You are quite a modern
young lady--morbid, delicate, professing to like retirement; which
implies, I suppose, that you find little worthy of your sympathies in
the ordinary world. The ordinary world--every-day honest folks--are
better than you think them, much better than any bookish, romancing chit
of a girl can be who hardly ever puts her nose over her uncle the
parson's garden wall."

"Consequently of whom you know nothing. Excuse me--indeed, it does not
matter whether you excuse me or not--you have attacked me without
provocation; I shall defend myself without apology. Of my relations with
my two cousins you are ignorant. In a fit of ill-humour you have
attempted to poison them by gratuitous insinuations, which are far more
crafty and false than anything with which you can justly charge me. That
I happen to be pale, and sometimes to look diffident, is no business of
yours; that I am fond of books, and indisposed for common gossip, is
still less your business; that I am a 'romancing chit of a girl' is a
mere conjecture on your part. I never romanced to you nor to anybody you
know. That I am the parson's niece is not a crime, though you may be
narrow-minded enough to think it so. You dislike me. You have no just
reason for disliking me; therefore keep the expression of your aversion
to yourself. If at any time in future you evince it annoyingly, I shall
answer even less scrupulously than I have done now."

She ceased, and sat in white and still excitement. She had spoken in the
clearest of tones, neither fast nor loud; but her silver accents
thrilled the ear. The speed of the current in her veins was just then as
swift as it was viewless.

Mrs. Yorke was not irritated at the reproof, worded with a severity so
simple, dictated by a pride so quiet. Turning coolly to Miss Moore, she
said, nodding her cap approvingly, "She has spirit in her, after
all.--Always speak as honestly as you have done just now," she
continued, "and you'll do."

"I repel a recommendation so offensive," was the answer, delivered in
the same pure key, with the same clear look. "I reject counsel poisoned
by insinuation. It is my right to speak as I think proper; nothing binds
me to converse as you dictate. So far from always speaking as I have
done just now, I shall never address any one in a tone so stern or in
language so harsh, unless in answer to unprovoked insult."

"Mother, you have found your match," pronounced little Jessie, whom the
scene appeared greatly to edify. Rose had heard the whole with an
unmoved face. She now said, "No; Miss Helstone is not my mother's match,
for she allows herself to be vexed. My mother would wear her out in a
few weeks. Shirley Keeldar manages better.--Mother, you have never hurt
Miss Keeldar's feelings yet. She wears armour under her silk dress that
you cannot penetrate."

Mrs. Yorke often complained that her children were mutinous. It was
strange that with all her strictness, with all her "strong-mindedness,"
she could gain no command over them. A look from their father had more
influence with them than a lecture from her.

Miss Moore--to whom the position of witness to an altercation in which
she took no part was highly displeasing, as being an unimportant
secondary post--now rallying her dignity, prepared to utter a discourse
which was to prove both parties in the wrong, and to make it clear to
each disputant that she had reason to be ashamed of herself, and ought
to submit humbly to the superior sense of the individual then addressing
her. Fortunately for her audience, she had not harangued above ten
minutes when Sarah's entrance with the tea-tray called her attention,
first to the fact of that damsel having a gilt comb in her hair and a
red necklace round her throat, and secondly, and subsequently to a
pointed remonstrance, to the duty of making tea. After the meal Rose
restored her to good-humour by bringing her guitar and asking for a
song, and afterwards engaging her in an intelligent and sharp
cross-examination about guitar-playing and music in general.

Jessie, meantime, directed her assiduities to Caroline. Sitting on a
stool at her feet, she talked to her, first about religion and then
about politics. Jessie was accustomed at home to drink in a great deal
of what her father said on these subjects, and afterwards in company to
retail, with more wit and fluency than consistency or discretion, his
opinions, antipathies, and preferences. She rated Caroline soundly for
being a member of the Established Church, and for having an uncle a
clergyman. She informed her that she lived on the country, and ought to
work for her living honestly, instead of passing a useless life, and
eating the bread of idleness in the shape of tithes. Thence Jessie
passed to a review of the ministry at that time in office, and a
consideration of its deserts. She made familiar mention of the names of
Lord Castlereagh and Mr. Perceval. Each of these personages she adorned
with a character that might have separately suited Moloch and Belial.
She denounced the war as wholesale murder, and Lord Wellington as a
"hired butcher."

Her auditress listened with exceeding edification. Jessie had something
of the genius of humour in her nature. It was inexpressibly comic to
hear her repeating her sire's denunciations in his nervous northern
Doric; as hearty a little Jacobin as ever pent a free mutinous spirit in
a muslin frock and sash. Not malignant by nature, her language was not
so bitter as it was racy, and the expressive little face gave a piquancy
to every phrase which held a beholder's interest captive.

Caroline chid her when she abused Lord Wellington; but she listened
delighted to a subsequent tirade against the Prince Regent. Jessie
quickly read, in the sparkle of her hearer's eye and the laughter
hovering round her lips, that at last she had hit on a topic that
pleased. Many a time had she heard the fat "Adonis of fifty" discussed
at her father's breakfast-table, and she now gave Mr. Yorke's comments
on the theme--genuine as uttered by his Yorkshire lips.

But, Jessie, I will write about you no more. This is an autumn evening,
wet and wild. There is only one cloud in the sky, but it curtains it
from pole to pole. The wind cannot rest; it hurries sobbing over hills
of sullen outline, colourless with twilight and mist. Rain has beat all
day on that church tower. It rises dark from the stony enclosure of its
graveyard. The nettles, the long grass, and the tombs all drip with wet.
This evening reminds me too forcibly of another evening some years
ago--a howling, rainy autumn evening too--when certain who had that day
performed a pilgrimage to a grave new-made in a heretic cemetery sat
near a wood fire on the hearth of a foreign dwelling. They were merry
and social, but they each knew that a gap, never to be filled, had been
made in their circle. They knew they had lost something whose absence
could never be quite atoned for so long as they lived; and they knew
that heavy falling rain was soaking into the wet earth which covered
their lost darling, and that the sad, sighing gale was mourning above
her buried head. The fire warmed them; life and friendship yet blessed
them; but Jessie lay cold, coffined, solitary--only the sod screening
her from the storm.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Yorke folded up her knitting, cut short the music lesson and the
lecture on politics, and concluded her visit to the cottage, at an hour
early enough to ensure her return to Briarmains before the blush of
sunset should quite have faded in heaven, or the path up the fields have
become thoroughly moist with evening dew.

The lady and her daughters being gone, Caroline felt that she also ought
to resume her scarf, kiss her cousin's cheek, and trip away homeward. If
she lingered much later dusk would draw on, and Fanny would be put to
the trouble of coming to fetch her. It was both baking and ironing day
at the rectory, she remembered--Fanny would be busy. Still, she could
not quit her seat at the little parlour window. From no point of view
could the west look so lovely as from that lattice with the garland of
jessamine round it, whose white stars and green leaves seemed now but
gray pencil outlines--graceful in form, but colourless in tint--against
the gold incarnadined of a summer evening--against the fire-tinged blue
of an August sky at eight o'clock p.m.

Caroline looked at the wicket-gate, beside which holly-oaks spired up
tall. She looked at the close hedge of privet and laurel fencing in the
garden; her eyes longed to see something more than the shrubs before
they turned from that limited prospect. They longed to see a human
figure, of a certain mould and height, pass the hedge and enter the
gate. A human figure she at last saw--nay, two. Frederick Murgatroyd
went by, carrying a pail of water; Joe Scott followed, dangling on his
forefinger the keys of the mill. They were going to lock up mill and
stables for the night, and then betake themselves home.

"So must I," thought Caroline, as she half rose and sighed.

"This is all folly--heart-breaking folly," she added. "In the first
place, though I should stay till dark there will be no arrival; because
I feel in my heart, Fate has written it down in to-day's page of her
eternal book, that I am not to have the pleasure I long for. In the
second place, if he stepped in this moment, my presence here would be a
chagrin to him, and the consciousness that it must be so would turn half
my blood to ice. His hand would, perhaps, be loose and chill if I put
mine into it; his eye would be clouded if I sought its beam. I should
look up for that kindling, something I have seen in past days, when my
face, or my language, or my disposition had at some happy moment pleased
him; I should discover only darkness. I had better go home."

She took her bonnet from the table where it lay, and was just fastening
the ribbon, when Hortense, directing her attention to a splendid bouquet
of flowers in a glass on the same table, mentioned that Miss Keeldar had
sent them that morning from Fieldhead; and went on to comment on the
guests that lady was at present entertaining, on the bustling life she
had lately been leading; adding divers conjectures that she did not very
well like it, and much wonderment that a person who was so fond of her
own way as the heiress did not find some means of sooner getting rid of
this _cortége_ of relatives.

"But they say she actually will not let Mr. Sympson and his family go,"
she added. "They wanted much to return to the south last week, to be
ready for the reception of the only son, who is expected home from a
tour. She insists that her cousin Henry shall come and join his friends
here in Yorkshire. I dare say she partly does it to oblige Robert and
myself."

"How to oblige Robert and you?" inquired Caroline.

"Why, my child, you are dull. Don't you know--you must often have
heard----"

"Please, ma'am," said Sarah, opening the door, "the preserves that you
told me to boil in treacle--the congfiters, as you call them--is all
burnt to the pan."

"Les confitures! Elles sont brûlées? Ah, quelle négligence coupable!
Coquine de cuisinière, fille insupportable!"

And mademoiselle, hastily taking from a drawer a large linen apron, and
tying it over her black apron, rushed _éperdue_ into the kitchen,
whence, to speak truth, exhaled an odour of calcined sweets rather
strong than savoury.

The mistress and maid had been in full feud the whole day, on the
subject of preserving certain black cherries, hard as marbles, sour as
sloes. Sarah held that sugar was the only orthodox condiment to be used
in that process; mademoiselle maintained--and proved it by the practice
and experience of her mother, grandmother, and great-grandmother--that
treacle, "mélasse," was infinitely preferable. She had committed an
imprudence in leaving Sarah in charge of the preserving-pan, for her
want of sympathy in the nature of its contents had induced a degree of
carelessness in watching their confection, whereof the result was--dark
and cindery ruin. Hubbub followed; high upbraiding, and sobs rather loud
than deep or real.

Caroline, once more turning to the little mirror, was shading her
ringlets from her cheek to smooth them under her cottage bonnet, certain
that it would not only be useless but unpleasant to stay longer, when,
on the sudden opening of the back-door, there fell an abrupt calm in the
kitchen. The tongues were checked, pulled up as with bit and bridle.
"Was it--was it--Robert?" He often--almost always--entered by the
kitchen way on his return from market. No; it was only Joe Scott, who,
having hemmed significantly thrice--every hem being meant as a lofty
rebuke to the squabbling womankind--said, "Now, I thowt I heerd a
crack?"

None answered.

"And," he continued pragmatically, "as t' maister's comed, and as he'll
enter through this hoyle, I _con_sidered it desirable to step in and let
ye know. A household o' women is nivver fit to be comed on wi'out
warning. Here he is.--Walk forrard, sir. They war playing up queerly,
but I think I've quietened 'em."

Another person, it was now audible, entered. Joe Scott proceeded with
his rebukes.

"What d'ye mean by being all i' darkness? Sarah, thou quean, canst t'
not light a candle? It war sundown an hour syne. He'll brak his shins
agean some o' yer pots, and tables, and stuff.--Tak tent o' this
baking-bowl, sir; they've set it i' yer way, fair as if they did it i'
malice."

To Joe's observations succeeded a confused sort of pause, which
Caroline, though she was listening with both her ears, could not
understand. It was very brief. A cry broke it--a sound of surprise,
followed by the sound of a kiss; ejaculations, but half articulate,
succeeded.

"Mon Dieu! mon Dieu! Est-ce que je m'y attendais?" were the words
chiefly to be distinguished.

"Et tu te portes toujours bien, bonne sœur?" inquired another
voice--Robert's, certainly.

Caroline was puzzled. Obeying an impulse the wisdom of which she had not
time to question, she escaped from the little parlour, by way of leaving
the coast clear, and running upstairs took up a position at the head of
the banisters, whence she could make further observations ere presenting
herself. It was considerably past sunset now; dusk filled the passage,
yet not such deep dusk but that she could presently see Robert and
Hortense traverse it.

"Caroline! Caroline!" called Hortense, a moment afterwards, "venez voir
mon frère!"

"Strange," commented Miss Helstone, "passing strange! What does this
unwonted excitement about such an every-day occurrence as a return from
market portend? She has not lost her senses, has she? Surely the burnt
treacle has not crazed her?"

She descended in a subdued flutter. Yet more was she fluttered when
Hortense seized her hand at the parlour door, and leading her to Robert,
who stood in bodily presence, tall and dark against the one window,
presented her with a mixture of agitation and formality, as though they
had been utter strangers, and this was their first mutual introduction.

Increasing puzzle! He bowed rather awkwardly, and turning from her with
a stranger's embarrassment, he met the doubtful light from the window.
It fell on his face, and the enigma of the dream (a dream it seemed)
was at its height. She saw a visage like and unlike--Robert, and no
Robert.

"What is the matter?" said Caroline. "Is my sight wrong? Is it my
cousin?"

"Certainly it is your cousin," asserted Hortense.

Then who was this now coming through the passage--now entering the room?
Caroline, looking round, met a new Robert--the real Robert, as she felt
at once.

"Well," said he, smiling at her questioning, astonished face, "which is
which?"

"Ah, this is _you_!" was the answer.

He laughed. "I believe it is _me_. And do you know who _he_ is? You
never saw him before, but you have heard of him."

She had gathered her senses now.

"It _can_ be only one person--your brother, since it is so like you; my
other cousin, Louis."

"Clever little Œdipus! you would have baffled the Sphinx! But now, see
us together.--Change places; change again, to confuse her, Louis.--Which
is the old love now, Lina?"

"As if it were possible to make a mistake when you speak! You should
have told Hortense to ask. But you are not so much alike. It is only
your height, your figure, and complexion that are so similar."

"And I am Robert, am I not?" asked the newcomer, making a first effort
to overcome what seemed his natural shyness.

Caroline shook her head gently. A soft, expressive ray from her eye
beamed on the real Robert. It said much.

She was not permitted to quit her cousins soon. Robert himself was
peremptory in obliging her to remain. Glad, simple, and affable in her
demeanour (glad for this night, at least), in light, bright spirits for
the time, she was too pleasant an addition to the cottage circle to be
willingly parted with by any of them. Louis seemed naturally rather a
grave, still, retiring man; but the Caroline of this evening, which was
not (as you know, reader) the Caroline of every day, thawed his reserve,
and cheered his gravity soon. He sat near her and talked to her. She
already knew his vocation was that of tuition. She learned now he had
for some years been the tutor of Mr. Sympson's son; that he had been
travelling with him, and had accompanied him to the north. She inquired
if he liked his post, but got a look in reply which did not invite or
license further question. The look woke Caroline's ready sympathy. She
thought it a very sad expression to pass over so sensible a face as
Louis's; for he _had_ a sensible face, though not handsome, she
considered, when seen near Robert's. She turned to make the comparison.
Robert was leaning against the wall, a little behind her, turning over
the leaves of a book of engravings, and probably listening, at the same
time, to the dialogue between her and Louis.

"How could I think them alike?" she asked herself. "I see now it is
Hortense Louis resembles, not Robert."

And this was in part true. He had the shorter nose and longer upper lip
of his sister rather than the fine traits of his brother. He had her
mould of mouth and chin--all less decisive, accurate, and clear than
those of the young mill-owner. His air, though deliberate and
reflective, could scarcely be called prompt and acute. You felt, in
sitting near and looking up at him, that a slower and probably a more
benignant nature than that of the elder Moore shed calm on your
impressions.

Robert--perhaps aware that Caroline's glance had wandered towards and
dwelt upon him, though he had neither met nor answered it--put down the
book of engravings, and approaching, took a seat at her side. She
resumed her conversation with Louis, but while she talked to him her
thoughts were elsewhere. Her heart beat on the side from which her face
was half averted. She acknowledged a steady, manly, kindly air in Louis;
but she bent before the secret power of Robert. To be so near
him--though he was silent, though he did not touch so much as her
scarf-fringe or the white hem of her dress--affected her like a spell.
Had she been obliged to speak to him _only_, it would have quelled, but,
at liberty to address another, it excited her. Her discourse flowed
freely; it was gay, playful, eloquent. The indulgent look and placid
manner of her auditor encouraged her to ease; the sober pleasure
expressed by his smile drew out all that was brilliant in her nature.
She felt that this evening she appeared to advantage, and as Robert was
a spectator, the consciousness contented her. Had he been called away,
collapse would at once have succeeded stimulus.

But her enjoyment was not long to shine full-orbed; a cloud soon crossed
it.

Hortense, who for some time had been on the move ordering supper, and
was now clearing the little table of some books, etc., to make room for
the tray, called Robert's attention to the glass of flowers, the carmine
and snow and gold of whose petals looked radiant indeed by candlelight.

"They came from Fieldhead," she said, "intended as a gift to you, no
doubt. We know who is the favourite there; not I, I'm sure."

It was a wonder to hear Hortense jest--a sign that her spirits were at
high-water mark indeed.

"We are to understand, then, that Robert is the favourite?" observed
Louis.

"Mon cher," replied Hortense, "Robert--c'est tout ce qu'il y a de plus
précieux au monde; à côté de lui le reste du genre humain n'est que du
rebut.--N'ai-je pas raison, mon enfant?" she added, appealing to
Caroline.

Caroline was obliged to reply, "Yes," and her beacon was quenched. Her
star withdrew as she spoke.

"Et toi, Robert?" inquired Louis.

"When you shall have an opportunity, ask herself," was the quiet answer.
Whether he reddened or paled Caroline did not examine. She discovered
that it was late, and she must go home. Home she would go; not even
Robert could detain her now.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH.


The future sometimes seems to sob a low warning of the events it is
bringing us, like some gathering though yet remote storm, which, in
tones of the wind, in flushings of the firmament, in clouds strangely
torn, announces a blast strong to strew the sea with wrecks; or
commissioned to bring in fog the yellow taint of pestilence covering
white Western isles with the poisoned exhalations of the East, dimming
the lattices of English homes with the breath of Indian plague. At other
times this future bursts suddenly, as if a rock had rent, and in it a
grave had opened, whence issues the body of one that slept. Ere you are
aware you stand face to face with a shrouded and unthought-of
calamity--a new Lazarus.

Caroline Helstone went home from Hollow's Cottage in good health, as she
imagined. On waking the next morning she felt oppressed with unwonted
languor. At breakfast, at each meal of the following day, she missed all
sense of appetite. Palatable food was as ashes and sawdust to her.

"Am I ill?" she asked, and looked at herself in the glass. Her eyes were
bright, their pupils dilated, her cheeks seemed rosier, and fuller than
usual. "I look well; why can I not eat?"

She felt a pulse beat fast in her temples; she felt, too, her brain in
strange activity. Her spirits were raised; hundreds of busy and broken
but brilliant thoughts engaged her mind. A glow rested on them, such as
tinged her complexion.

Now followed a hot, parched, thirsty, restless night. Towards morning
one terrible dream seized her like a tiger; when she woke, she felt and
knew she was ill.

How she had caught the fever (fever it was) she could not tell. Probably
in her late walk home, some sweet, poisoned breeze, redolent of
honey-dew and miasma, had passed into her lungs and veins, and finding
there already a fever of mental excitement, and a languor of long
conflict and habitual sadness, had fanned the spark to flame, and left a
well-lit fire behind it.

It seemed, however, but a gentle fire. After two hot days and worried
nights, there was no violence in the symptoms, and neither her uncle,
nor Fanny, nor the doctor, nor Miss Keeldar, when she called, had any
fear for her. A few days would restore her, every one believed.

The few days passed, and--though it was still thought it could not long
delay--the revival had not begun. Mrs. Pryor, who had visited her
daily--being present in her chamber one morning when she had been ill a
fortnight--watched her very narrowly for some minutes. She took her hand
and placed her finger on her wrist; then, quietly leaving the chamber,
she went to Mr. Helstone's study. With him she remained closeted a long
time--half the morning. On returning to her sick young friend, she laid
aside shawl and bonnet. She stood awhile at the bedside, one hand placed
in the other, gently rocking herself to and fro, in an attitude and with
a movement habitual to her. At last she said, "I have sent Fanny to
Fieldhead to fetch a few things for me, such as I shall want during a
short stay here. It is my wish to remain with you till you are better.
Your uncle kindly permits my attendance. Will it to yourself be
acceptable, Caroline?"

"I am sorry you should take such needless trouble. I do not feel very
ill, but I cannot refuse resolutely. It will be such comfort to know you
are in the house, to see you sometimes in the room; but don't confine
yourself on my account, dear Mrs. Pryor. Fanny nurses me very well."

Mrs. Pryor, bending over the pale little sufferer, was now smoothing the
hair under her cap, and gently raising her pillow. As she performed
these offices, Caroline, smiling, lifted her face to kiss her.

"Are you free from pain? Are you tolerably at ease?" was inquired in a
low, earnest voice, as the self-elected nurse yielded to the caress.

"I think I am almost happy."

"You wish to drink? Your lips are parched."

She held a glass filled with some cooling beverage to her mouth.

"Have you eaten anything to-day, Caroline?"

"I cannot eat."

"But soon your appetite will return; it _must_ return--that is, I pray
God it may."

In laying her again on the couch, she encircled her in her arms; and
while so doing, by a movement which seemed scarcely voluntary, she drew
her to her heart, and held her close gathered an instant.

"I shall hardly wish to get well, that I may keep you always," said
Caroline.

Mrs. Pryor did not smile at this speech. Over her features ran a tremor,
which for some minutes she was absorbed in repressing.

"You are more used to Fanny than to me," she remarked ere long. "I
should think my attendance must seem strange, officious?"

"No; quite natural, and very soothing. You must have been accustomed to
wait on sick people, ma'am. You move about the room so softly, and you
speak so quietly, and touch me so gently."

"I am dexterous in nothing, my dear. You will often find me awkward, but
never negligent."

Negligent, indeed, she was not. From that hour Fanny and Eliza became
ciphers in the sick-room. Mrs. Pryor made it her domain; she performed
all its duties; she lived in it day and night. The patient
remonstrated--faintly, however, from the first, and not at all ere long.
Loneliness and gloom were now banished from her bedside; protection and
solace sat there instead. She and her nurse coalesced in wondrous union.
Caroline was usually pained to require or receive much attendance. Mrs.
Pryor, under ordinary circumstances, had neither the habit nor the art
of performing little offices of service; but all now passed with such
ease, so naturally, that the patient was as willing to be cherished as
the nurse was bent on cherishing; no sign of weariness in the latter
ever reminded the former that she ought to be anxious. There was, in
fact, no very hard duty to perform; but a hireling might have found it
hard.

With all this care it seemed strange the sick girl did not get well; yet
such was the case. She wasted like any snow-wreath in thaw; she faded
like any flower in drought. Miss Keeldar, on whose thoughts danger or
death seldom intruded, had at first entertained no fears at all for her
friend; but seeing her change and sink from time to time when she paid
her visits, alarm clutched her heart. She went to Mr. Helstone and
expressed herself with so much energy that that gentleman was at last
obliged, however unwillingly, to admit the idea that his niece was ill
of something more than a migraine; and when Mrs. Pryor came and quietly
demanded a physician, he said she might send for two if she liked. One
came, but that one was an oracle. He delivered a dark saying of which
the future was to solve the mystery, wrote some prescriptions, gave some
directions--the whole with an air of crushing authority--pocketed his
fee, and went. Probably he knew well enough he could do no good, but
didn't like to say so.

Still, no rumour of serious illness got wind in the neighbourhood. At
Hollow's Cottage it was thought that Caroline had only a severe cold,
she having written a note to Hortense to that effect; and mademoiselle
contented herself with sending two pots of currant jam, a recipe for a
tisane, and a note of advice.

Mrs. Yorke being told that a physician had been summoned, sneered at the
hypochondriac fancies of the rich and idle, who, she said, having
nothing but themselves to think about, must needs send for a doctor if
only so much as their little finger ached.

The "rich and idle," represented in the person of Caroline, were
meantime falling fast into a condition of prostration, whose quickly
consummated debility puzzled all who witnessed it except one; for that
one alone reflected how liable is the undermined structure to sink in
sudden ruin.

Sick people often have fancies inscrutable to ordinary attendants, and
Caroline had one which even her tender nurse could not at first explain.
On a certain day in the week, at a certain hour, she would--whether
worse or better--entreat to be taken up and dressed, and suffered to sit
in her chair near the window. This station she would retain till noon
was past. Whatever degree of exhaustion or debility her wan aspect
betrayed, she still softly put off all persuasion to seek repose until
the church clock had duly tolled midday. The twelve strokes sounded, she
grew docile, and would meekly lie down. Returned to the couch, she
usually buried her face deep in the pillow, and drew the coverlets close
round her, as if to shut out the world and sun, of which she was tired.
More than once, as she thus lay, a slight convulsion shook the sick-bed,
and a faint sob broke the silence round it. These things were not
unnoted by Mrs. Pryor.

One Tuesday morning, as usual, she had asked leave to rise, and now she
sat wrapped in her white dressing-gown, leaning forward in the
easy-chair, gazing steadily and patiently from the lattice. Mrs. Pryor
was seated a little behind, knitting as it seemed, but, in truth,
watching her. A change crossed her pale, mournful brow, animating its
languor; a light shot into her faded eyes, reviving their lustre; she
half rose and looked earnestly out. Mrs. Pryor, drawing softly near,
glanced over her shoulder. From this window was visible the churchyard,
beyond it the road; and there, riding sharply by, appeared a horseman.
The figure was not yet too remote for recognition. Mrs. Pryor had long
sight; she knew Mr. Moore. Just as an intercepting rising ground
concealed him from view, the clock struck twelve.

"May I lie down again?" asked Caroline.

Her nurse assisted her to bed. Having laid her down and drawn the
curtain, she stood listening near. The little couch trembled, the
suppressed sob stirred the air. A contraction as of anguish altered Mrs.
Pryor's features; she wrung her hands; half a groan escaped her lips.
She now remembered that Tuesday was Whinbury market day. Mr. Moore must
always pass the rectory on his way thither, just ere noon of that day.

Caroline wore continually round her neck a slender braid of silk,
attached to which was some trinket. Mrs. Pryor had seen the bit of gold
glisten, but had not yet obtained a fair view of it. Her patient never
parted with it. When dressed it was hidden in her bosom; as she lay in
bed she always held it in her hand. That Tuesday afternoon the transient
doze--more like lethargy than sleep--which sometimes abridged the long
days, had stolen over her. The weather was hot. While turning in febrile
restlessness, she had pushed the coverlets a little aside. Mrs. Pryor
bent to replace them. The small, wasted hand, lying nerveless on the
sick girl's breast, clasped as usual her jealously-guarded treasure.
Those fingers whose attenuation it gave pain to see were now relaxed in
sleep. Mrs. Pryor gently disengaged the braid, drawing out a tiny
locket--a slight thing it was, such as it suited her small purse to
purchase. Under its crystal face appeared a curl of black hair, too
short and crisp to have been severed from a female head.

Some agitated movement occasioned a twitch of the silken chain. The
sleeper started and woke. Her thoughts were usually now somewhat
scattered on waking, her look generally wandering. Half rising, as if
in terror, she exclaimed, "Don't take it from me, Robert! Don't! It is
my last comfort; let me keep it. I never tell any one whose hair it is;
I never show it."

Mrs. Pryor had already disappeared behind the curtain. Reclining far
back in a deep arm-chair by the bedside, she was withdrawn from view.
Caroline looked abroad into the chamber; she thought it empty. As her
stray ideas returned slowly, each folding its weak wings on the mind's
sad shore, like birds exhausted, beholding void, and perceiving silence
round her, she believed herself alone. Collected she was not yet;
perhaps healthy self-possession and self-control were to be hers no
more; perhaps that world the strong and prosperous live in had already
rolled from beneath her feet for ever. So, at least, it often seemed to
herself. In health she had never been accustomed to think aloud, but now
words escaped her lips unawares.

"Oh, I _should_ see him once more before all is over! Heaven _might_
favour me thus far!" she cried. "God grant me a little comfort before I
die!" was her humble petition.

"But he will not know I am ill till I am gone, and he will come when
they have laid me out, and I am senseless, cold, and stiff.

"What can my departed soul feel then? Can it see or know what happens to
the clay? Can spirits, through any medium, communicate with living
flesh? Can the dead at all revisit those they leave? Can they come in
the elements? Will wind, water, fire, lend me a path to Moore?

"Is it for nothing the wind sounds almost articulately sometimes--sings
as I have lately heard it sing at night--or passes the casement sobbing,
as if for sorrow to come? Does nothing, then, haunt it, nothing inspire
it?

"Why, it suggested to me words one night; it poured a strain which I
could have written down, only I was appalled, and dared not rise to seek
pencil and paper by the dim watch-light.

"What is that electricity they speak of, whose changes make us well or
ill, whose lack or excess blasts, whose even balance revives? What are
all those influences that are about us in the atmosphere, that keep
playing over our nerves like fingers on stringed instruments, and call
forth now a sweet note, and now a wail--now an exultant swell, and anon
the saddest cadence?

"_Where is_ the other world? In _what_ will another life consist? Why do
I ask? Have I not cause to think that the hour is hasting but too fast
when the veil must be rent for me? Do I not know the Grand Mystery is
likely to burst prematurely on me? Great Spirit, in whose goodness I
confide, whom, as my Father, I have petitioned night and morning from
early infancy, help the weak creation of Thy hands! Sustain me through
the ordeal I dread and must undergo! Give me strength! Give me patience!
Give me--oh, _give me_ FAITH!"

She fell back on her pillow. Mrs. Pryor found means to steal quietly
from the room. She re-entered it soon after, apparently as composed as
if she had really not overheard this strange soliloquy.

The next day several callers came. It had become known that Miss
Helstone was worse. Mr. Hall and his sister Margaret arrived. Both,
after they had been in the sickroom, quitted it in tears; they had found
the patient more altered than they expected. Hortense Moore came.
Caroline seemed stimulated by her presence. She assured her, smiling,
she was not dangerously ill; she talked to her in a low voice, but
cheerfully. During her stay, excitement kept up the flush of her
complexion; she looked better.

"How is Mr. Robert?" asked Mrs. Pryor, as Hortense was preparing to take
leave.

"He was very well when he left."

"Left! Is he gone from home?"

It was then explained that some police intelligence about the rioters of
whom he was in pursuit had, that morning, called him away to Birmingham,
and probably a fortnight might elapse ere he returned.

"He is not aware that Miss Helstone is very ill?"

"Oh no! He thought, like me, that she had only a bad cold."

After this visit, Mrs. Pryor took care not to approach Caroline's couch
for above an hour. She heard her weep, and dared not look on her tears.

As evening closed in, she brought her some tea. Caroline, opening her
eyes from a moment's slumber, viewed her nurse with an unrecognizing
glance.

"I smelt the honeysuckles in the glen this summer morning," she said,
"as I stood at the counting-house window."

Strange words like these from pallid lips pierce a loving listener's
heart more poignantly than steel. They sound romantic, perhaps, in
books; in real life they are harrowing.

"My darling, do you know me?" said Mrs. Pryor.

"I went in to call Robert to breakfast. I have been with him in the
garden. He asked me to go. A heavy dew has refreshed the flowers. The
peaches are ripening."

"My darling! my darling!" again and again repeated the nurse.

"I thought it was daylight--long after sunrise. It looks dark. Is the
moon now set?"

That moon, lately risen, was gazing full and mild upon her. Floating in
deep blue space, it watched her unclouded.

"Then it is not morning? I am not at the cottage? Who is this? I see a
shape at my bedside."

"It is myself--it is your friend--your nurse--your---- Lean your head on
my shoulder. Collect yourself." In a lower tone--"O God, take pity! Give
_her_ life, and _me_ strength! Send me courage! Teach me words!"

Some minutes passed in silence. The patient lay mute and passive in the
trembling arms, on the throbbing bosom of the nurse.

"I am better now," whispered Caroline at last, "much better. I feel
where I am. This is Mrs. Pryor near me. I was dreaming. I talk when I
wake up from dreams; people often do in illness. How fast your heart
beats, ma'am! Do not be afraid."

"It is not fear, child--only a little anxiety, which will pass. I have
brought you some tea, Cary. Your uncle made it himself. You know he says
he can make a better cup of tea than any housewife can. Taste it. He is
concerned to hear that you eat so little; he would be glad if you had a
better appetite."

"I am thirsty. Let me drink."

She drank eagerly.

"What o'clock is it, ma'am?" she asked.

"Past nine."

"Not later? Oh! I have yet a long night before me. But the tea has made
me strong. I will sit up."

Mrs. Pryor raised her, and arranged her pillows.

"Thank Heaven! I am not always equally miserable, and ill, and hopeless.
The afternoon has been bad since Hortense went; perhaps the evening may
be better. It is a fine night, I think? The moon shines clear."

"Very fine--a perfect summer night. The old church-tower gleams white
almost as silver."

"And does the churchyard look peaceful?"

"Yes, and the garden also. Dew glistens on the foliage."

"Can you see many long weeds and nettles amongst the graves? or do they
look turfy and flowery?"

"I see closed daisy-heads gleaming like pearls on some mounds. Thomas
has mown down the dock-leaves and rank grass, and cleared all away."

"I always like that to be done; it soothes one's mind to see the place
in order. And, I dare say, within the church just now that moonlight
shines as softly as in my room. It will fall through the east window
full on the Helstone monument. When I close my eyes I seem to see poor
papa's epitaph in black letters on the white marble. There is plenty of
room for other inscriptions underneath."

"William Farren came to look after your flowers this morning. He was
afraid, now you cannot tend them yourself, they would be neglected. He
has taken two of your favourite plants home to nurse for you."

"If I were to make a will, I would leave William all my plants; Shirley
my trinkets--except one, which must not be taken off my neck; and you,
ma'am, my books." After a pause--"Mrs. Pryor, I feel a longing wish for
something."

"For what, Caroline?"

"You know I always delight to hear you sing. Sing me a hymn just now.
Sing that hymn which begins,--

    'Our God, our help in ages past,
       Our hope for years to come,
     Our shelter from the stormy blast,
       Our refuge, haven, home!'"

Mrs. Pryor at once complied.

No wonder Caroline liked to hear her sing. Her voice, even in speaking,
was sweet and silver clear; in song it was almost divine. Neither flute
nor dulcimer has tones so pure. But the tone was secondary, compared to
the expression which trembled through--a tender vibration from a feeling
heart.

The servants in the kitchen, hearing the strain, stole to the stair-foot
to listen. Even old Helstone, as he walked in the garden, pondering over
the unaccountable and feeble nature of women, stood still amongst his
borders to catch the mournful melody more distinctly. Why it reminded
him of his forgotten dead wife, he could not tell; nor why it made him
more concerned than he had hitherto been for Caroline's fading girlhood.
He was glad to recollect that he had promised to pay Wynne, the
magistrate, a visit that evening. Low spirits and gloomy thoughts were
