very much his aversion. When they attacked him he usually found means to
make them march in double-quick time. The hymn followed him faintly as
he crossed the fields. He hastened his customary sharp pace, that he
might get beyond its reach.

    "Thy word commands our flesh to dust,--
       'Return, ye sons of men;'
     All nations rose from earth at first,
       And turn to earth again.

    "A thousand ages in Thy sight
       Are like an evening gone--
     Short as the watch that ends the night
       Before the rising sun.

    "Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
       Bears all its sons away;
     They fly, forgotten, as a dream
       Dies at the opening day.

    "Like flowery fields, the nations stand,
       Fresh in the morning light;
     The flowers beneath the mower's hand
       Lie withering ere 'tis night.

    "Our God, our help in ages past,
       Our hope for years to come,
     Be Thou our guard while troubles last--
       O Father, be our home!"

"Now sing a song--a Scottish song," suggested Caroline, when the hymn
was over--"'Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon.'"

Again Mrs. Pryor obeyed, or essayed to obey. At the close of the first
stanza she stopped. She could get no further. Her full heart flowed
over.

"You are weeping at the pathos of the air. Come here, and I will comfort
you," said Caroline, in a pitying accent. Mrs. Pryor came. She sat down
on the edge of her patient's bed, and allowed the wasted arms to
encircle her.

"You often soothe me; let me soothe you," murmured the young girl,
kissing her cheek. "I hope," she added, "it is not for me you weep?"

No answer followed.

"Do you think I shall not get better? I do not feel _very_ ill--only
weak."

"But your mind, Caroline--your mind is crushed. Your heart is almost
broken; you have been so neglected, so repulsed, left so desolate."

"I believe grief is, and always has been, my worst ailment. I sometimes
think if an abundant gush of happiness came on me I could revive yet."

"Do you wish to live?"

"I have no object in life."

"You love me, Caroline?"

"Very much--very truly--inexpressibly sometimes. Just now I feel as if I
could almost grow to your heart."

"I will return directly, dear," remarked Mrs. Pryor, as she laid
Caroline down.

Quitting her, she glided to the door, softly turned the key in the lock,
ascertained that it was fast, and came back. She bent over her. She
threw back the curtain to admit the moonlight more freely. She gazed
intently on her face.

"Then, if you love me," said she, speaking quickly, with an altered
voice; "if you feel as if, to use your own words, you could 'grow to my
heart,' it will be neither shock nor pain for you to know that _that_
heart is the source whence yours was filled; that from _my_ veins issued
the tide which flows in _yours_; that you are _mine_--my daughter--my
own child."

"Mrs. Pryor----"

"My own child!"

"That is--that means--you have adopted me?"

"It means that, if I have given you nothing else, I at least gave you
life; that I bore you, nursed you; that I am your true mother. No other
woman can claim the title; it is _mine_."

"But Mrs. James Helstone--but my father's wife, whom I do not remember
ever to have seen, she is my mother?"

"She _is_ your mother. James Helstone was _my_ husband. I say you are
_mine_. I have proved it. I thought perhaps you were all his, which
would have been a cruel dispensation for me. I find it is _not_ so. God
permitted me to be the parent of my child's mind. It belongs to me; it
is my property--my _right_. These features are James's own. He had a
fine face when he was young, and not altered by error. Papa, my darling,
gave you your blue eyes and soft brown hair; he gave you the oval of
your face and the regularity of your lineaments--the outside _he_
conferred; but the heart and the brain are _mine_. The germs are from
_me_, and they are improved, they are developed to excellence. I esteem
and approve my child as highly as I do most fondly love her."

"Is what I hear true? Is it no dream?"

"I wish it were as true that the substance and colour of health were
restored to your cheek."

"My own mother! is she one I can be so fond of as I can of you? People
generally did not like her--so I have been given to understand."

"They told you that? Well, your mother now tells you that, not having
the gift to please people generally, for their approbation she does not
care. Her thoughts are centred in her child. Does that child welcome or
reject her?"

"But if you _are_ my mother, the world is all changed to me. Surely I
can live. I should like to recover----"

"You _must_ recover. You drew life and strength from my breast when you
were a tiny, fair infant, over whose blue eyes I used to weep, fearing I
beheld in your very beauty the sign of qualities that had entered my
heart like iron, and pierced through my soul like a sword. Daughter! we
have been long parted; I return now to cherish you again."

She held her to her bosom; she cradled her in her arms; she rocked her
softly, as if lulling a young child to sleep.

"My mother--my own mother!"

The offspring nestled to the parent; that parent, feeling the endearment
and hearing the appeal, gathered her closer still. She covered her with
noiseless kisses; she murmured love over her, like a cushat fostering
its young.

There was silence in the room for a long while.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Does my uncle know?"

"Your uncle knows. I told him when I first came to stay with you here."

"Did you recognize me when we first met at Fieldhead?"

"How could it be otherwise? Mr. and Miss Helstone being announced, I was
prepared to see my child."

"It was that, then, which moved you. I saw you disturbed."

"You saw nothing, Caroline; I can cover my feelings. You can never tell
what an age of strange sensation I lived, during the two minutes that
elapsed between the report of your name and your entrance. You can never
tell how your look, mien, carriage, shook me."

"Why? Were you disappointed?"

"What will she be like? I had asked myself; and when I saw what you were
like, I could have dropped."

"Mamma, why?"

"I trembled in your presence. I said, I will never own her; she shall
never know me."

"But I said and did nothing remarkable. I felt a little diffident at the
thought of an introduction to strangers--that was all."

"I soon saw you were diffident. That was the first thing which reassured
me. Had you been rustic, clownish, awkward, I should have been content."

"You puzzle me."

"I had reason to dread a fair outside, to mistrust a popular bearing, to
shudder before distinction, grace, and courtesy. Beauty and affability
had come in my way when I was recluse, desolate, young, and ignorant--a
toil-worn governess perishing of uncheered labour, breaking down before
her time. These, Caroline, when they smiled on me, I mistook for angels.
I followed them home; and when into their hands I had given without
reserve my whole chance of future happiness, it was my lot to witness a
transfiguration on the domestic hearth--to see the white mask lifted,
the bright disguise put away, and opposite me sat down---- O God, I
_have_ suffered!"

She sank on the pillow.

"I _have_ suffered! None saw--none knew. There was no sympathy, no
redemption, no redress!"

"Take comfort, mother. It is over now."

"It is over, and not fruitlessly. I tried to keep the word of His
patience. He kept me in the days of my anguish. I was afraid with
terror--I was troubled. Through great tribulation He brought me through
to a salvation revealed in this last time. My fear had torment; He has
cast it out. He has given me in its stead perfect love. But,
Caroline----"

Thus she invoked her daughter after a pause.

"Mother!"

"I charge you, when you next look on your father's monument, to respect
the name chiselled there. To you he did only good. On you he conferred
his whole treasure of beauties, nor added to them one dark defect. All
_you_ derived from him is excellent. You owe him gratitude. Leave,
between him and me, the settlement of our mutual account. Meddle not.
God is the arbiter. This world's laws never came near us--never! They
were powerless as a rotten bulrush to protect me--impotent as idiot
babblings to restrain him! As you said, it is all over now; the grave
lies between us. There he sleeps, in that church. To his dust I say this
night, what I have never said before, 'James, slumber peacefully! See!
your terrible debt is cancelled! Look! I wipe out the long, black
account with my own hand! James, your child atones. This living likeness
of you--this thing with your perfect features--this one good gift you
gave me has nestled affectionately to my heart, and tenderly called me
"mother." Husband, rest forgiven!'"

"Dearest mother, that is right! Can papa's spirit hear us? Is he
comforted to know that we still love him?"

"I said nothing of love. I spoke of forgiveness. Mind the truth, child;
I said nothing of love! On the threshold of eternity, should he be there
to see me enter, will I maintain that."

"O mother, you must have suffered!"

"O child, the human heart _can_ suffer! It can hold more tears than the
ocean holds waters. We never know how deep, how wide it is, till misery
begins to unbind her clouds, and fill it with rushing blackness."

"Mother, forget."

"Forget!" she said, with the strangest spectre of a laugh. "The north
pole will rush to the south, and the headlands of Europe be locked into
the bays of Australia ere I forget."

"Hush, mother! Rest! Be at peace!"

And the child lulled the parent, as the parent had erst lulled the
child. At last Mrs. Pryor wept. She then grew calmer. She resumed those
tender cares agitation had for a moment suspended. Replacing her
daughter on the couch, she smoothed the pillow and spread the sheet. The
soft hair whose locks were loosened she rearranged, the damp brow she
refreshed with a cool, fragrant essence.

"Mamma, let them bring a candle, that I may see you; and tell my uncle
to come into this room by-and-by. I want to hear him say that I am your
daughter. And, mamma, take your supper here. Don't leave me for one
minute to-night."

"O Caroline, it is well you are gentle! You will say to me, Go, and I
shall go; Come, and I shall come; Do this, and I shall do it. You
inherit a certain manner as well as certain features. It will always be
'mamma' prefacing a mandate--softly spoken, though, from you, thank God!
Well," she added, under her breath, "he spoke softly too, once, like a
flute breathing tenderness; and then, when the world was not by to
listen, discords that split the nerves and curdled the blood--sounds to
inspire insanity."

"It seems so natural, mamma, to ask you for this and that. I shall want
nobody but you to be near me, or to do anything for me. But do not let
me be troublesome. Check me if I encroach."

"You must not depend on me to check you; you must keep guard over
yourself. I have little moral courage; the want of it is my bane. It is
that which has made me an unnatural parent--which has kept me apart from
my child during the ten years which have elapsed since my husband's
death left me at liberty to claim her. It was that which first unnerved
my arms and permitted the infant I might have retained a while longer to
be snatched prematurely from their embrace."

"How, mamma?"

"I let you go as a babe, because you were pretty, and I feared your
loveliness, deeming it the stamp of perversity. They sent me your
portrait, taken at eight years old; that portrait confirmed my fears.
Had it shown me a sunburnt little rustic--a heavy, blunt-featured,
commonplace child--I should have hastened to claim you; but there, under
the silver paper, I saw blooming the delicacy of an aristocratic
flower--'little lady' was written on every trait. I had too recently
crawled from under the yoke of the fine gentleman--escaped galled,
crushed, paralyzed, dying--to dare to encounter his still finer and most
fairy-like representative. My sweet little lady overwhelmed me with
dismay; her air of native elegance froze my very marrow. In my
experience I had not met with truth, modesty, good principle as the
concomitants of beauty. A form so straight and fine, I argued, must
conceal a mind warped and cruel. I had little faith in the power of
education to rectify such a mind; or rather, I entirely misdoubted my
own ability to influence it. Caroline, I dared not undertake to rear
you. I resolved to leave you in your uncle's hands. Matthewson Helstone
I knew, if an austere, was an upright man. He and all the world thought
hardly of me for my strange, unmotherly resolve, and I deserved to be
misjudged."

"Mamma, why did you call yourself Mrs. Pryor?"

"It was a name in my mother's family. I adopted it that I might live
unmolested. My married name recalled too vividly my married life; I
could not bear it. Besides, threats were uttered of forcing me to return
to bondage. It could not be. Rather a bier for a bed, the grave for a
home. My new name sheltered me. I resumed under its screen my old
occupation of teaching. At first it scarcely procured me the means of
sustaining life; but how savoury was hunger when I fasted in peace! How
safe seemed the darkness and chill of an unkindled hearth when no lurid
reflection from terror crimsoned its desolation! How serene was
solitude, when I feared not the irruption of violence and vice!"

"But, mamma, you have been in this neighbourhood before. How did it
happen that when you reappeared here with Miss Keeldar you were not
recognized?"

"I only paid a short visit, as a bride, twenty years ago, and then I was
very different to what I am now--slender, almost as slender as my
daughter is at this day. My complexion, my very features are changed; my
hair, my style of dress--everything is altered. You cannot fancy me a
slim young person, attired in scanty drapery of white muslin, with bare
arms, bracelets and necklace of beads, and hair disposed in round
Grecian curls above my forehead?"

"You must, indeed, have been different. Mamma, I heard the front door
open. If it is my uncle coming in, just ask him to step upstairs, and
let me hear his assurance that I am truly awake and collected, and not
dreaming or delirious."

The rector, of his own accord, was mounting the stairs, and Mrs. Pryor
summoned him to his niece's apartment.

"She's not worse, I hope?" he inquired hastily.

"I think her better. She is disposed to converse; she seems stronger."

"Good!" said he, brushing quickly into the room.--"Ha, Cary! how do? Did
you drink my cup of tea? I made it for you just as I like it myself."

"I drank it every drop, uncle. It did me good; it has made me quite
alive. I have a wish for company, so I begged Mrs. Pryor to call you
in."

The respected ecclesiastic looked pleased, and yet embarrassed. He was
willing enough to bestow his company on his sick niece for ten minutes,
since it was her whim to wish it; but what means to employ for her
entertainment he knew not. He hemmed--he fidgeted.

"You'll be up in a trice," he observed, by way of saying something. "The
little weakness will soon pass off; and then you must drink port wine--a
pipe, if you can--and eat game and oysters. I'll get them for you, if
they are to be had anywhere. Bless me! we'll make you as strong as
Samson before we're done with you."

"Who is that lady, uncle, standing beside you at the bed-foot?"

"Good God!" he ejaculated. "She's not wandering, is she, ma'am?"

Mrs. Pryor smiled.

"I am wandering in a pleasant world," said Caroline, in a soft, happy
voice, "and I want you to tell me whether it is real or visionary. What
lady is that? Give her a name, uncle."

"We must have Dr. Rile again, ma'am; or better still, MacTurk. He's less
of a humbug. Thomas must saddle the pony and go for him."

"No; I don't want a doctor. Mamma shall be my only physician. Now, do
you understand, uncle?"

Mr. Helstone pushed up his spectacles from his nose to his forehead,
handled his snuff-box, and administered to himself a portion of the
contents. Thus fortified, he answered briefly, "I see daylight. You've
told her then, ma'am?"

"And is it _true_?" demanded Caroline, rising on her pillow. "Is she
_really_ my mother?"

"You won't cry, or make any scene, or turn hysterical, if I answer Yes?"

"Cry! I'd cry if you said _No_. It would be terrible to be disappointed
now. But give her a name. How do you call her?"

"I call this stout lady in a quaint black dress, who looks young enough
to wear much smarter raiment, if she would--I call her Agnes Helstone.
She married my brother James, and is his widow."

"And my mother?"

"What a little sceptic it is! Look at her small face, Mrs. Pryor,
scarcely larger than the palm of my hand, alive with acuteness and
eagerness." To Caroline--"She had the trouble of bringing you into the
world at any rate. Mind you show your duty to her by quickly getting
well, and repairing the waste of these cheeks.--Heigh-ho! she used to be
plump. What she has done with it all I can't, for the life of me,
divine."

"If _wishing_ to get well will help me, I shall not be long sick. This
morning I had no reason and no strength to wish it."

Fanny here tapped at the door, and said that supper was ready.

"Uncle, if you please, you may send me a little bit of supper--anything
you like, from your own plate. That is wiser than going into hysterics,
is it not?"

"It is spoken like a sage, Cary. See if I don't cater for you
judiciously. When women are sensible, and, above all, intelligible, I
can get on with them. It is only the vague, superfine sensations, and
extremely wire-drawn notions, that put me about. Let a woman ask me to
give her an edible or a wearable--be the same a roc's egg or the
breastplate of Aaron, a share of St. John's locusts and honey or the
leathern girdle about his loins--I can, at least, understand the demand;
but when they pine for they know not what--sympathy, sentiment, some of
these indefinite abstractions--I can't do it; I don't know it; I haven't
got it.--Madam, accept my arm."

Mrs. Pryor signified that she should stay with her daughter that
evening. Helstone, accordingly, left them together. He soon returned,
bringing a plate in his own consecrated hand.

"This is chicken," he said, "but we'll have partridge to-morrow.--Lift
her up, and put a shawl over her. On my word, I understand
nursing.--Now, here is the very same little silver fork you used when
you first came to the rectory. That strikes me as being what you may
call a happy thought--a delicate attention. Take it, Cary, and munch
away cleverly."

Caroline did her best. Her uncle frowned to see that her powers were so
limited. He prophesied, however, great things for the future; and as she
praised the morsel he had brought, and smiled gratefully in his face, he
stooped over her pillow, kissed her, and said, with a broken, rugged
accent, "Good-night, bairnie! God bless thee!"

Caroline enjoyed such peaceful rest that night, circled by her mother's
arms, and pillowed on her breast, that she forgot to wish for any other
stay; and though more than one feverish dream came to her in slumber,
yet, when she woke up panting, so happy and contented a feeling returned
with returning consciousness that her agitation was soothed almost as
soon as felt.

As to the mother, she spent the night like Jacob at Peniel. Till break
of day she wrestled with God in earnest prayer.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE WEST WIND BLOWS.


Not always do those who dare such divine conflict prevail. Night after
night the sweat of agony may burst dark on the forehead; the supplicant
may cry for mercy with that soundless voice the soul utters when its
appeal is to the Invisible. "Spare my beloved," it may implore. "Heal my
life's life. Rend not from me what long affection entwines with my whole
nature. God of heaven, bend, hear, be clement!" And after this cry and
strife the sun may rise and see him worsted. That opening morn, which
used to salute him with the whisper of zephyrs, the carol of skylarks,
may breathe, as its first accents, from the dear lips which colour and
heat have quitted, "Oh! I have had a suffering night. This morning I am
worse. I have tried to rise. I cannot. Dreams I am unused to have
troubled me."

Then the watcher approaches the patient's pillow, and sees a new and
strange moulding of the familiar features, feels at once that the
insufferable moment draws nigh, knows that it is God's will his idol
shall be broken, and bends his head, and subdues his soul to the
sentence he cannot avert and scarce can bear.

Happy Mrs. Pryor! She was still praying, unconscious that the summer sun
hung above the hills, when her child softly woke in her arms. No
piteous, unconscious moaning--sound which so wastes our strength that,
even if we have sworn to be firm, a rush of unconquerable tears sweeps
away the oath--preceded her waking. No space of deaf apathy followed.
The first words spoken were not those of one becoming estranged from
this world, and already permitted to stray at times into realms foreign
to the living. Caroline evidently remembered with clearness what had
happened.

"Mamma, I have slept _so_ well. I only dreamed and woke twice."

Mrs. Pryor rose with a start, that her daughter might not see the joyful
tears called into her eyes by that affectionate word "mamma," and the
welcome assurance that followed it.

For many days the mother dared rejoice only with trembling. That first
revival seemed like the flicker of a dying lamp. If the flame streamed
up bright one moment, the next it sank dim in the socket. Exhaustion
followed close on excitement.

There was always a touching endeavour to _appear_ better, but too often
ability refused to second will; too often the attempt to bear up failed.
The effort to eat, to talk, to look cheerful, was unsuccessful. Many an
hour passed during which Mrs. Pryor feared that the chords of life could
never more be strengthened, though the time of their breaking might be
deferred.

During this space the mother and daughter seemed left almost alone in
the neighbourhood. It was the close of August; the weather was
fine--that is to say, it was very dry and very dusty, for an arid wind
had been blowing from the east this month past; very cloudless, too,
though a pale haze, stationary in the atmosphere, seemed to rob of all
depth of tone the blue of heaven, of all freshness the verdure of earth,
and of all glow the light of day. Almost every family in Briarfield was
absent on an excursion. Miss Keeldar and her friends were at the
seaside; so were Mrs. Yorke's household. Mr. Hall and Louis Moore,
between whom a spontaneous intimacy seemed to have arisen--the result,
probably, of harmony of views and temperament--were gone "up north" on a
pedestrian excursion to the Lakes. Even Hortense, who would fain have
stayed at home and aided Mrs. Pryor in nursing Caroline, had been so
earnestly entreated by Miss Mann to accompany her once more to Wormwood
Wells, in the hope of alleviating sufferings greatly aggravated by the
insalubrious weather, that she felt obliged to comply; indeed, it was
not in her nature to refuse a request that at once appealed to her
goodness of heart, and, by a confession of dependency, flattered her
_amour propre_. As for Robert, from Birmingham he had gone on to London,
where he still sojourned.

So long as the breath of Asiatic deserts parched Caroline's lips and
fevered her veins, her physical convalescence could not keep pace with
her returning mental tranquillity; but there came a day when the wind
ceased to sob at the eastern gable of the rectory, and at the oriel
window of the church. A little cloud like a man's hand arose in the
west; gusts from the same quarter drove it on and spread it wide; wet
and tempest prevailed a while. When that was over the sun broke out
genially, heaven regained its azure, and earth its green; the livid
cholera-tint had vanished from the face of nature; the hills rose clear
round the horizon, absolved from that pale malaria-haze.

Caroline's youth could now be of some avail to her, and so could her
mother's nurture. Both, crowned by God's blessing, sent in the pure west
wind blowing soft as fresh through the ever-open chamber lattice,
rekindled her long-languishing energies. At last Mrs. Pryor saw that it
was permitted to hope: a genuine, material convalescence had commenced.
It was not merely Caroline's smile which was brighter, or her spirits
which were cheered, but a certain look had passed from her face and
eye--a look dread and indescribable, but which will easily be recalled
by those who have watched the couch of dangerous disease. Long before
the emaciated outlines of her aspect began to fill, or its departed
colour to return, a more subtle change took place; all grew softer and
warmer. Instead of a marble mask and glassy eye, Mrs. Pryor saw laid on
the pillow a face pale and wasted enough, perhaps more haggard than the
other appearance, but less awful; for it was a sick, living girl, not a
mere white mould or rigid piece of statuary.

Now, too, she was not always petitioning to drink. The words, "I am _so_
thirsty," ceased to be her plaint. Sometimes, when she had swallowed a
morsel, she would say it had revived her. All descriptions of food were
no longer equally distasteful; she could be induced, sometimes, to
indicate a preference. With what trembling pleasure and anxious care did
not her nurse prepare what was selected! How she watched her as she
partook of it!

Nourishment brought strength. She could sit up. Then she longed to
breathe the fresh air, to revisit her flowers, to see how the fruit had
ripened. Her uncle, always liberal, had bought a garden-chair for her
express use. He carried her down in his own arms, and placed her in it
himself, and William Farren was there to wheel her round the walks, to
show her what he had done amongst her plants, to take her directions for
further work.

William and she found plenty to talk about. They had a dozen topics in
common--interesting to them, unimportant to the rest of the world. They
took a similar interest in animals, birds, insects, and plants; they
held similar doctrines about humanity to the lower creation, and had a
similar turn for minute observation on points of natural history. The
nest and proceedings of some ground-bees, which had burrowed in the turf
under an old cherry-tree, was one subject of interest; the haunts of
certain hedge-sparrows, and the welfare of certain pearly eggs and
callow fledglings, another.

Had _Chambers's Journal_ existed in those days, it would certainly have
formed Miss Helstone's and Farren's favourite periodical. She would have
subscribed for it, and to him each number would duly have been lent;
both would have put implicit faith and found great savour in its
marvellous anecdotes of animal sagacity.

This is a digression, but it suffices to explain why Caroline would have
no other hand than William's to guide her chair, and why his society and
conversation sufficed to give interest to her garden-airings.

Mrs. Pryor, walking near, wondered how her daughter could be so much at
ease with a "man of the people." _She_ found it impossible to speak to
him otherwise than stiffly. She felt as if a great gulf lay between her
caste and his, and that to cross it or meet him half-way would be to
degrade herself. She gently asked Caroline, "Are you not afraid, my
dear, to converse with that person so unreservedly? He may presume, and
become troublesomely garrulous."

"William presume, mamma? You don't know him. He never presumes. He is
altogether too proud and sensitive to do so. William has very fine
feelings."

And Mrs. Pryor smiled sceptically at the naïve notion of that
rough-handed, rough-headed, fustian-clad clown having "fine feelings."

Farren, for his part, showed Mrs. Pryor only a very sulky brow. He knew
when he was misjudged, and was apt to turn unmanageable with such as
failed to give him his due.

The evening restored Caroline entirely to her mother, and Mrs. Pryor
liked the evening; for then, alone with her daughter, no human shadow
came between her and what she loved. During the day she would have her
stiff demeanour and cool moments, as was her wont. Between her and Mr.
Helstone a very respectful but most rigidly ceremonious intercourse was
kept up. Anything like familiarity would have bred contempt at once in
one or both these personages; but by dint of strict civility and
well-maintained distance they got on very smoothly.

Towards the servants Mrs. Pryor's bearing was not uncourteous, but shy,
freezing, ungenial. Perhaps it was diffidence rather than pride which
made her appear so haughty; but, as was to be expected, Fanny and Eliza
failed to make the distinction, and she was unpopular with them
accordingly. She felt the effect produced; it rendered her at times
dissatisfied with herself for faults she could not help, and with all
else dejected, chill, and taciturn.

This mood changed to Caroline's influence, and to that influence alone.
The dependent fondness of her nursling, the natural affection of her
child, came over her suavely. Her frost fell away, her rigidity unbent;
she grew smiling and pliant. Not that Caroline made any wordy profession
of love--that would ill have suited Mrs. Pryor; she would have read
therein the proof of insincerity--but she hung on her with easy
dependence; she confided in her with fearless reliance. These things
contented the mother's heart.

She liked to hear her daughter say, "Mamma, do this;" "Please, mamma,
fetch me that;" "Mamma, read to me;" "Sing a little, mamma."

Nobody else--not one living thing--had ever so claimed her services, so
looked for help at her hand. Other people were always more or less
reserved and stiff with her, as she was reserved and stiff with them;
other people betrayed consciousness of and annoyance at her weak points.
Caroline no more showed such wounding sagacity or reproachful
sensitiveness now than she had done when a suckling of three months old.

Yet Caroline could find fault. Blind to the constitutional defects that
were incurable, she had her eyes wide open to the acquired habits that
were susceptible of remedy. On certain points she would quite artlessly
lecture her parent; and that parent, instead of being hurt, felt a
sensation of pleasure in discovering that the girl _dared_ lecture her,
that she was so much at home with her.

"Mamma, I am determined you shall not wear that old gown any more. Its
fashion is not becoming; it is too strait in the skirt. You shall put on
your black silk every afternoon. In that you look nice; it suits you.
And you shall have a black satin dress for Sundays--a real satin, not a
satinet or any of the shams. And, mamma, when you get the new one, mind
you must wear it."

"My dear, I thought of the black silk serving me as a best dress for
many years yet, and I wished to buy you several things."

"Nonsense, mamma. My uncle gives me cash to get what I want. You know he
is generous enough; and I have set my heart on seeing you in a black
satin. Get it soon, and let it be made by a dressmaker of my
recommending. Let me choose the pattern. You always want to disguise
yourself like a grandmother. You would persuade one that you are old and
ugly. Not at all! On the contrary, when well dressed and cheerful you
are very comely indeed; your smile is so pleasant, your teeth are so
white, your hair is still such a pretty light colour. And then you speak
like a young lady, with such a clear, fine tone, and you sing better
than any young lady I ever heard. Why do you wear such dresses and
bonnets, mamma, such as nobody else ever wears?"

"Does it annoy you, Caroline?"

"Very much; it vexes me even. People say you are miserly; and yet you
are not, for you give liberally to the poor and to religious
societies--though your gifts are conveyed so secretly and quietly that
they are known to few except the receivers. But I will be your
lady's-maid myself. When I get a little stronger I will set to work, and
you must be good, mamma, and do as I bid you."

And Caroline, sitting near her mother, rearranged her muslin
handkerchief and resmoothed her hair.

"My own mamma," then she went on, as if pleasing herself with the
thought of their relationship, "who belongs to me, and to whom I belong!
I am a rich girl now. I have something I can love well, and not be
afraid of loving. Mamma, who gave you this little brooch? Let me unpin
it and look at it."

Mrs. Pryor, who usually shrank from meddling fingers and near approach,
allowed the license complacently.

"Did papa give you this, mamma?"

"My sister gave it me--my only sister, Cary. Would that your Aunt
Caroline had lived to see her niece!"

"Have you nothing of papa's--no trinket, no gift of his?"

"I have one thing."

"That you prize?"

"That I prize."

"Valuable and pretty?"

"Invaluable and sweet to me."

"Show it, mamma. Is it here or at Fieldhead?"

"It is talking to me now, leaning on me. Its arms are round me."

"Ah, mamma, you mean your teasing daughter, who will never let you
alone; who, when you go into your room, cannot help running to seek for
you; who follows you upstairs and down, like a dog."

"Whose features still give me such a strange thrill sometimes. I half
fear your fair looks yet, child."

"You don't; you can't. Mamma, I am sorry papa was not good. I do so wish
he had been. Wickedness spoils and poisons all pleasant things. It kills
love. If you and I thought each other wicked, we could not love each
other, could we?"

"And if we could not trust each other, Cary?"

"How miserable we should be! Mother, before I knew you I had an
apprehension that you were not good--that I could not esteem you. That
dread damped my wish to see you. And now my heart is elate because I
find you perfect--almost; kind, clever, nice. Your sole fault is that
you are old-fashioned, and of that I shall cure you. Mamma, put your
work down; read to me. I like your southern accent; it is so pure, so
soft. It has no rugged burr, no nasal twang, such as almost every one's
voice here in the north has. My uncle and Mr. Hall say that you are a
fine reader, mamma. Mr. Hall said he never heard any lady read with such
propriety of expression or purity of accent."

"I wish I could reciprocate the compliment, Cary; but, really, the first
time I heard your truly excellent friend read and preach I could not
understand his broad northern tongue."

"Could you understand me, mamma? Did I seem to speak roughly?"

"No. I almost wished you had, as I wished you had looked unpolished.
Your father, Caroline, naturally spoke well, quite otherwise than your
worthy uncle--correctly, gently, smoothly. You inherit the gift."

"Poor papa! When he was so agreeable, why was he not good?"

"Why he was _as_ he was--and happily of that you, child, can form no
conception--I cannot tell. It is a deep mystery. The key is in the hands
of his Maker. There I leave it."

"Mamma, you will keep stitching, stitching away. Put down the sewing; I
am an enemy to it. It cumbers your lap, and I want it for my head; it
engages your eyes, and I want them for a book. Here is your
favourite--Cowper."

These importunities were the mother's pleasure. If ever she delayed
compliance, it was only to hear them repeated, and to enjoy her child's
soft, half-playful, half-petulant urgency. And then, when she yielded,
Caroline would say archly, "You will spoil me, mamma. I always thought I
should like to be spoiled, and I find it very sweet." So did Mrs.
Pryor.




CHAPTER XXVI.

OLD COPY-BOOKS.


By the time the Fieldhead party returned to Briarfield Caroline was
nearly well. Miss Keeldar, who had received news by post of her friend's
convalescence, hardly suffered an hour to elapse between her arrival at
home and her first call at the rectory.

A shower of rain was falling gently, yet fast, on the late flowers and
russet autumn shrubs, when the garden wicket was heard to swing open,
and Shirley's well-known form passed the window. On her entrance her
feelings were evinced in her own peculiar fashion. When deeply moved by
serious fears or joys she was not garrulous. The strong emotion was
rarely suffered to influence her tongue, and even her eye refused it
more than a furtive and fitful conquest. She took Caroline in her arms,
gave her one look, one kiss, then said, "You are better."

And a minute after, "I see you are safe now; but take care. God grant
your health may be called on to sustain no more shocks!"

She proceeded to talk fluently about the journey. In the midst of
vivacious discourse her eye still wandered to Caroline. There spoke in
its light a deep solicitude, some trouble, and some amaze.

"She may be better," it said, "but how weak she still is! What peril she
has come through!"

Suddenly her glance reverted to Mrs. Pryor. It pierced her through.

"When will my governess return to me?" she asked.

"May I tell her all?" demanded Caroline of her mother. Leave being
signified by a gesture, Shirley was presently enlightened on what had
happened in her absence.

"Very good," was the cool comment--"very good! But it is no news to me."

"What! did you know?"

"I guessed long since the whole business. I have heard somewhat of Mrs.
Pryor's history--not from herself, but from others. With every detail of
Mr. James Helstone's career and character I was acquainted. An
afternoon's sitting and conversation with Miss Mann had rendered me
familiar therewith; also he is one of Mrs. Yorke's warning examples--one
of the blood-red lights she hangs out to scare young ladies from
matrimony. I believe I should have been sceptical about the truth of the
portrait traced by such fingers--both these ladies take a dark pleasure
in offering to view the dark side of life--but I questioned Mr. Yorke on
the subject, and he said, 'Shirley, my woman, if you want to know aught
about yond' James Helstone, I can only say he was a man-tiger. He was
handsome, dissolute, soft, treacherous, courteous, cruel----' Don't cry,
Cary; we'll say no more about it."

"I am not crying, Shirley; or if I am, it is nothing. Go on; you are no
friend if you withhold from me the truth. I hate that false plan of
disguising, mutilating the truth."

"Fortunately I have said pretty nearly all that I have to say, except
that your uncle himself confirmed Mr. Yorke's words; for he too scorns a
lie, and deals in none of those conventional subterfuges that are
shabbier than lies."

"But papa is dead; they should let him alone now."

"They should; and we _will_ let him alone. Cry away, Cary; it will do
you good. It is wrong to check natural tears. Besides, I choose to
please myself by sharing an idea that at this moment beams in your
mother's eye while she looks at you. Every drop blots out a sin. Weep!
your tears have the virtue which the rivers of Damascus lacked. Like
Jordan, they can cleanse a leprous memory."

"Madam," she continued, addressing Mrs. Pryor, "did you think I could be
daily in the habit of seeing you and your daughter together--marking
your marvellous similarity in many points, observing (pardon me) your
irrepressible emotions in the presence and still more in the absence of
your child--and not form my own conjectures? I formed them, and they are
literally correct. I shall begin to think myself shrewd."

"And you said nothing?" observed Caroline, who soon regained the quiet
control of her feelings.

"Nothing. I had no warrant to breathe a word on the subject. _My_
business it was not; I abstained from making it such."

"You guessed so deep a secret, and did not hint that you guessed it?"

"Is that so difficult?"

"It is not like you."

"How do you know?"

"You are not reserved; you are frankly communicative."

"I may be communicative, yet know where to stop. In showing my treasure
I may withhold a gem or two--a curious, unbought graven stone--an amulet
of whose mystic glitter I rarely permit even myself a glimpse.
Good-day."

Caroline thus seemed to get a view of Shirley's character under a novel
aspect. Ere long the prospect was renewed; it opened upon her.

No sooner had she regained sufficient strength to bear a change of
scene--the excitement of a little society--than Miss Keeldar sued daily
for her presence at Fieldhead. Whether Shirley had become wearied of her
honoured relatives is not known. She did not say she was; but she
claimed and retained Caroline with an eagerness which proved that an
addition to that worshipful company was not unwelcome.

The Sympsons were church people. Of course the rector's niece was
received by them with courtesy. Mr. Sympson proved to be a man of
spotless respectability, worrying temper, pious principles, and worldly
views; his lady was a very good woman--patient, kind, well-bred. She had
been brought up on a narrow system of views, starved on a few
prejudices--a mere handful of bitter herbs; a few preferences, soaked
till their natural flavour was extracted, and with no seasoning added in
the cooking; some excellent principles, made up in a stiff raised crust
of bigotry difficult to digest. Far too submissive was she to complain
of this diet or to ask for a crumb beyond it.

The daughters were an example to their sex. They were tall, with a Roman
nose apiece. They had been educated faultlessly. All they did was well
done. History and the most solid books had cultivated their minds.
Principles and opinions they possessed which could not be mended. More
exactly-regulated lives, feelings, manners, habits, it would have been
difficult to find anywhere. They knew by heart a certain
young-ladies'-schoolroom code of laws on language, demeanour, etc.;
themselves never deviated from its curious little pragmatical
provisions, and they regarded with secret whispered horror all
deviations in others. The Abomination of Desolation was no mystery to
them; they had discovered that unutterable Thing in the characteristic
others call Originality. Quick were they to recognize the signs of this
evil; and wherever they saw its trace--whether in look, word, or deed;
whether they read it in the fresh, vigorous style of a book, or listened
to it in interesting, unhackneyed, pure, expressive language--they
shuddered, they recoiled. Danger was above their heads, peril about
their steps. What was this strange thing? Being unintelligible it must
be bad. Let it be denounced and chained up.

Henry Sympson, the only son and youngest child of the family, was a boy
of fifteen. He generally kept with his tutor. When he left him, he
sought his cousin Shirley. This boy differed from his sisters. He was
little, lame, and pale; his large eyes shone somewhat languidly in a wan
orbit. They were, indeed, usually rather dim, but they were capable of
illumination. At times they could not only shine, but blaze. Inward
emotion could likewise give colour to his cheek and decision to his
crippled movements. Henry's mother loved him; she thought his
peculiarities were a mark of election. He was not like other children,
she allowed. She believed him regenerate--a new Samuel--called of God
from his birth. He was to be a clergyman. Mr. and the Misses Sympson,
not understanding the youth, let him much alone. Shirley made him her
pet, and he made Shirley his playmate.

In the midst of this family circle, or rather outside it, moved the
tutor--the satellite.

Yes, Louis Moore was a satellite of the house of Sympson--connected, yet
apart; ever attendant, ever distant. Each member of that correct family
treated him with proper dignity. The father was austerely civil,
sometimes irritable; the mother, being a kind woman, was attentive, but
formal; the daughters saw in him an abstraction, not a man. It seemed,
by their manner, that their brother's tutor did not live for them. They
were learned; so was he--but not for them. They were accomplished; he
had talents too, imperceptible to their senses. The most spirited sketch
from his fingers was a blank to their eyes; the most original
observation from his lips fell unheard on their ears. Nothing could
exceed the propriety of their behaviour.

I should have said nothing could have equalled it; but I remember a fact
which strangely astonished Caroline Helstone. It was--to discover that
her cousin had absolutely _no_ sympathizing friend at Fieldhead; that to
Miss Keeldar he was as much a mere teacher, as little a gentleman, as
little a man, as to the estimable Misses Sympson.

What had befallen the kind-hearted Shirley that she should be so
indifferent to the dreary position of a fellow-creature thus isolated
under her roof? She was not, perhaps, haughty to him, but she never
noticed him--she let him alone. He came and went, spoke or was silent,
and she rarely recognized his existence.

As to Louis Moore himself, he had the air of a man used to this life,
and who had made up his mind to bear it for a time. His faculties seemed
walled up in him, and were unmurmuring in their captivity. He never
laughed; he seldom smiled; he was uncomplaining. He fulfilled the round
of his duties scrupulously. His pupil loved him; he asked nothing more
than civility from the rest of the world. It even appeared that he would
accept nothing more--in that abode at least; for when his cousin
Caroline made gentle overtures of friendship, he did not encourage
them--he rather avoided than sought her. One living thing alone, besides
his pale, crippled scholar, he fondled in the house, and that was the
ruffianly Tartar, who, sullen and impracticable to others, acquired a
singular partiality for him--a partiality so marked that sometimes, when
Moore, summoned to a meal, entered the room and sat down unwelcomed,
Tartar would rise from his lair at Shirley's feet and betake himself to
the taciturn tutor. Once--but once--she noticed the desertion, and
holding out her white hand, and speaking softly, tried to coax him back.
Tartar looked, slavered, and sighed, as his manner was, but yet
disregarded the invitation, and coolly settled himself on his haunches
at Louis Moore's side. That gentleman drew the dog's big, black-muzzled
head on to his knee, patted him, and smiled one little smile to himself.

An acute observer might have remarked, in the course of the same
evening, that after Tartar had resumed his allegiance to Shirley, and
was once more couched near her footstool, the audacious tutor by one
word and gesture fascinated him again. He pricked up his ears at the
word; he started erect at the gesture, and came, with head lovingly
depressed, to receive the expected caress. As it was given, the
significant smile again rippled across Moore's quiet face.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Shirley," said Caroline one day, as they two were sitting alone in the
summer-house, "did you know that my cousin Louis was tutor in your
uncle's family before the Sympsons came down here?"

Shirley's reply was not so prompt as her responses usually were, but at
last she answered, "Yes--of course; I knew it well."

"I thought you must have been aware of the circumstance."

"Well! what then?"

"It puzzles me to guess how it chanced that you never mentioned it to
me."

"Why should it puzzle you?"

"It seems odd. I cannot account for it. You talk a great deal--you talk
freely. How was that circumstance never touched on?"

"Because it never was," and Shirley laughed.

"You are a singular being!" observed her friend. "I thought I knew you
quite well; I begin to find myself mistaken. You were silent as the
grave about Mrs. Pryor, and now again here is another secret. But why
