
"Your hearing is acute."

"It is never dull, and the sense seems sharpened at present. Sir Philip
was here to tea last night. I heard you sing to him some song which he
had brought you. I heard him, when he took his departure at eleven
o'clock, call you out on to the pavement, to look at the evening star."

"You must be nervously sensitive."

"I heard him kiss your hand."

"Impossible!"

"No: my chamber is over the hall, the window just above the front door;
the sash was a little raised, for I felt feverish. You stood ten minutes
with him on the steps. I heard your discourse, every word, and I heard
the salute.--Henry, give me some water."

"Let me give it him."

But he half rose to take the glass from young Sympson, and declined her
attendance.

"And can I do nothing?"

"Nothing; for you cannot guarantee me a night's peaceful rest, and it is
all I at present want."

"You do not sleep well?"

"Sleep has left me."

"Yet you said you were not very ill?"

"I am often sleepless when in high health."

"If I had power, I would lap you in the most placid slumber--quite deep
and hushed, without a dream."

"Blank annihilation! I do not ask that."

"With dreams of all you most desire."

"Monstrous delusions! The sleep would be delirium, the waking death."

"Your wishes are not so chimerical; you are no visionary."

"Miss Keeldar, I suppose you think so; but my character is not, perhaps,
quite as legible to you as a page of the last new novel might be."

"That is possible. But this sleep--I _should_ like to woo it to your
pillow, to win for you its favour. If I took a book and sat down and
read some pages? I can well spare half an hour."

"Thank you, but I will not detain you."

"I would read softly."

"It would not do. I am too feverish and excitable to bear a soft,
cooing, vibrating voice close at my ear. You had better leave me."

"Well, I will go."

"And no good-night?"

"Yes, sir, yes. Mr. Moore, good-night." (Exit Shirley.)

"Henry, my boy, go to bed now; it is time you had some repose."

"Sir, it would please me to watch at your bedside all night."

"Nothing less called for. I am getting better. There, go."

"Give me your blessing, sir."

"God bless you, my best pupil!"

"You never call me your dearest pupil!"

"No, nor ever shall."

       *       *       *       *       *

Possibly Miss Keeldar resented her former teacher's rejection of her
courtesy. It is certain she did not repeat the offer of it. Often as her
light step traversed the gallery in the course of a day, it did not
again pause at his door; nor did her "cooing, vibrating voice" disturb a
second time the hush of the sickroom. A sickroom, indeed, it soon ceased
to be; Mr. Moore's good constitution quickly triumphed over his
indisposition. In a few days he shook it off, and resumed his duties as
tutor.

That "auld lang syne" had still its authority both with preceptor and
scholar was proved by the manner in which he sometimes promptly passed
the distance she usually maintained between them, and put down her high
reserve with a firm, quiet hand.

One afternoon the Sympson family were gone out to take a carriage
airing. Shirley, never sorry to snatch a reprieve from their society,
had remained behind, detained by business, as she said. The business--a
little letter-writing--was soon dispatched after the yard gates had
closed on the carriage; Miss Keeldar betook herself to the garden.

It was a peaceful autumn day. The gilding of the Indian summer mellowed
the pastures far and wide. The russet woods stood ripe to be stripped,
but were yet full of leaf. The purple of heath-bloom, faded but not
withered, tinged the hills. The beck wandered down to the Hollow,
through a silent district; no wind followed its course or haunted its
woody borders. Fieldhead gardens bore the seal of gentle decay. On the
walks, swept that morning, yellow leaves had fluttered down again. Its
time of flowers, and even of fruits, was over; but a scantling of
apples enriched the trees. Only a blossom here and there expanded pale
and delicate amidst a knot of faded leaves.

These single flowers--the last of their race--Shirley culled as she
wandered thoughtfully amongst the beds. She was fastening into her
girdle a hueless and scentless nosegay, when Henry Sympson called to her
as he came limping from the house.

"Shirley, Mr. Moore would be glad to see you in the schoolroom and to
hear you read a little French, if you have no more urgent occupation."

The messenger delivered his commission very simply, as if it were a mere
matter of course.

"Did Mr. Moore tell you to say that?"

"Certainly; why not? And now, do come, and let us once more be as we
were at Sympson Grove. We used to have pleasant school-hours in those
days."

Miss Keeldar perhaps thought that circumstances were changed since then;
however, she made no remark, but after a little reflection quietly
followed Henry.

Entering the schoolroom, she inclined her head with a decent obeisance,
as had been her wont in former times. She removed her bonnet, and hung
it up beside Henry's cap. Louis Moore sat at his desk, turning the
leaves of a book, open before him, and marking passages with his pencil.
He just moved, in acknowledgment of her curtsy, but did not rise.

"You proposed to read to me a few nights ago," said he. "I could not
hear you then. My attention is now at your service. A little renewed
practice in French may not be unprofitable. Your accent, I have
observed, begins to rust."

"What book shall I take?"

"Here are the posthumous works of St. Pierre. Read a few pages of the
'Fragments de l'Amazone.'"

She accepted the chair which he had placed in readiness near his own;
the volume lay on his desk--there was but one between them; her sweeping
curls dropped so low as to hide the page from him.

"Put back your hair," he said.

For one moment Shirley looked not quite certain whether she would obey
the request or disregard it. A flicker of her eye beamed furtive on the
professor's face. Perhaps if he had been looking at her harshly or
timidly, or if one undecided line had marked his countenance, she would
have rebelled, and the lesson had ended there and then; but he was only
awaiting her compliance--as calm as marble, and as cool. She threw the
veil of tresses behind her ear. It was well her face owned an agreeable
outline, and that her cheek possessed the polish and the roundness of
early youth, or, thus robbed of a softening shade, the contours might
have lost their grace. But what mattered that in the present society?
Neither Calypso nor Eucharis cared to fascinate Mentor.

She began to read. The language had become strange to her tongue; it
faltered; the lecture flowed unevenly, impeded by hurried breath, broken
by Anglicized tones. She stopped.

"I can't do it. Read me a paragraph, if you please, Mr. Moore."

What _he_ read _she_ repeated. She caught his accent in three minutes.

"Très bien," was the approving comment at the close of the piece.

"C'est presque le Français rattrapé, n'est-ce pas?"

"You could not write French as you once could, I dare say?"

"Oh no! I should make strange work of my concords now."

"You could not compose the _devoir_ of 'La Première Femme Savante'?"

"Do you still remember that rubbish?"

"Every line."

"I doubt you."

"I will engage to repeat it word for word."

"You would stop short at the first line."

"Challenge me to the experiment."

"I challenge you."

He proceeded to recite the following. He gave it in French, but we must
translate, on pain of being unintelligible to some readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of
       the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons
       of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they
       took them wives of all which they chose."

This was in the dawn of time, before the morning stars were set, and
while they yet sang together.

The epoch is so remote, the mists and dewy gray of matin twilight veil
it with so vague an obscurity, that all distinct feature of custom, all
clear line of locality, evade perception and baffle research. It must
suffice to know that the world then existed; that men peopled it; that
man's nature, with its passions, sympathies, pains, and pleasures,
informed the planet and gave it soul.

A certain tribe colonized a certain spot on the globe; of what race this
tribe--unknown; in what region that spot--untold. We usually think of
the East when we refer to transactions of that date; but who shall
declare that there was no life in the West, the South, the North? What
is to disprove that this tribe, instead of camping under palm groves in
Asia, wandered beneath island oak woods rooted in our own seas of
Europe?

It is no sandy plain, nor any circumscribed and scant oasis I seem to
realize. A forest valley, with rocky sides and brown profundity of
shade, formed by tree crowding on tree, descends deep before me. Here,
indeed, dwell human beings, but so few, and in alleys so thick branched
and overarched, they are neither heard nor seen. Are they savage?
Doubtless. They live by the crook and the bow; half shepherds, half
hunters, their flocks wander wild as their prey. Are they happy? No, not
more happy than we are at this day. Are they good? No, not better than
ourselves. Their nature is our nature--human both. There is one in this
tribe too often miserable--a child bereaved of both parents. None cares
for this child. She is fed sometimes, but oftener forgotten. A hut
rarely receives her; the hollow tree and chill cavern are her home.
Forsaken, lost, and wandering, she lives more with the wild beast and
bird than with her own kind. Hunger and cold are her comrades; sadness
hovers over, and solitude besets her round. Unheeded and unvalued, she
should die; but she both lives and grows. The green wilderness nurses
her, and becomes to her a mother; feeds her on juicy berry, on
saccharine root and nut.

There is something in the air of this clime which fosters life kindly.
There must be something, too, in its dews which heals with sovereign
balm. Its gentle seasons exaggerate no passion, no sense; its
temperature tends to harmony; its breezes, you would say, bring down
from heaven the germ of pure thought and purer feeling. Not grotesquely
fantastic are the forms of cliff and foliage, not violently vivid the
colouring of flower and bird. In all the grandeur of these forests
there is repose; in all their freshness there is tenderness.

The gentle charm vouchsafed to flower and tree, bestowed on deer and
dove, has not been denied to the human nursling. All solitary, she has
sprung up straight and graceful. Nature cast her features in a fine
mould; they have matured in their pure, accurate first lines, unaltered
by the shocks of disease. No fierce dry blast has dealt rudely with the
surface of her frame; no burning sun has crisped or withered her
tresses. Her form gleams ivory-white through the trees; her hair flows
plenteous, long, and glossy; her eyes, not dazzled by vertical fires,
beam in the shade large and open, and full and dewy. Above those eyes,
when the breeze bares her forehead, shines an expanse fair and ample--a
clear, candid page, whereon knowledge, should knowledge ever come, might
write a golden record. You see in the desolate young savage nothing
vicious or vacant. She haunts the wood harmless and thoughtful, though
of what one so untaught can think it is not easy to divine.

On the evening of one summer day, before the Flood, being utterly
alone--for she had lost all trace of her tribe, who had wandered leagues
away, she knew not where--she went up from the vale, to watch Day take
leave and Night arrive. A crag overspread by a tree was her station. The
oak roots, turfed and mossed, gave a seat; the oak boughs, thick-leaved,
wove a canopy.

Slow and grand the Day withdrew, passing in purple fire, and parting to
the farewell of a wild, low chorus from the woodlands. Then Night
entered, quiet as death. The wind fell, the birds ceased singing. Now
every nest held happy mates, and hart and hind slumbered blissfully safe
in their lair.

The girl sat, her body still, her soul astir; occupied, however, rather
in feeling than in thinking, in wishing than hoping, in imagining than
projecting. She felt the world, the sky, the night, boundlessly mighty.
Of all things herself seemed to herself the centre--a small, forgotten
atom of life, a spark of soul, emitted inadvertent from the great
creative source, and now burning unmarked to waste in the heart of a
black hollow. She asked, was she thus to burn out and perish, her living
light doing no good, never seen, never needed--a star in an else
starless firmament, which nor shepherd, nor wanderer, nor sage, nor
priest tracked as a guide or read as a prophecy? Could this be, she
demanded, when the flame of her intelligence burned so vivid; when her
life beat so true, and real, and potent; when something within her
stirred disquieted, and restlessly asserted a God-given strength, for
which it insisted she should find exercise?

She gazed abroad on Heaven and Evening. Heaven and Evening gazed back on
her. She bent down, searching bank, hill, river, spread dim below. All
she questioned responded by oracles. She heard--she was impressed; but
she could not understand. Above her head she raised her hands joined
together.

"Guidance--help--comfort--come!" was her cry.

There was no voice, nor any that answered.

She waited, kneeling, steadfastly looking up. Yonder sky was sealed; the
solemn stars shone alien and remote.

At last one overstretched chord of her agony slacked; she thought
Something above relented; she felt as if Something far round drew
nigher; she heard as if Silence spoke. There was no language, no word,
only a tone.

Again--a fine, full, lofty tone, a deep, soft sound, like a storm
whispering, made twilight undulate.

Once more, profounder, nearer, clearer, it rolled harmonious.

Yet again--a distinct voice passed between Heaven and Earth.

"Eva!"

If Eva were not this woman's name, she had none. She rose. "Here am I."

"Eva!"

"O Night (it can be but Night that speaks), I am here!"

The voice, descending, reached Earth.

"Eva!"

"Lord," she cried, "behold thine handmaid!"

She had her religion--all tribes held some creed.

"I come--a Comforter!"

"Lord, come quickly!"

The Evening flushed full of hope; the Air panted; the Moon--rising
before--ascended large, but her light showed no shape.

"Lean towards me, Eva. Enter my arms; repose thus."

"Thus I lean, O Invisible but felt! And what art thou?"

"Eva, I have brought a living draught from heaven. Daughter of Man,
drink of my cup!"

"I drink: it is as if sweetest dew visited my lips in a full current. My
arid heart revives; my affliction is lightened; my strait and struggle
are gone. And the night changes! the wood, the hill, the moon, the wide
sky--all change!"

"All change, and for ever. I take from thy vision darkness; I loosen
from thy faculties fetters! I level in thy path obstacles; I with my
presence fill vacancy. I claim as mine the lost atom of life. I take to
myself the spark of soul--burning heretofore forgotten!"

"O take me! O claim me! This is a god."

"This is a son of God--one who feels himself in the portion of life that
stirs you. He is suffered to reclaim his own, and so to foster and aid
that it shall not perish hopeless."

"A son of God! Am I indeed chosen?"

"Thou only in this land. I saw thee that thou wert fair; I knew thee
that thou wert mine. To me it is given to rescue, to sustain, to cherish
mine own. Acknowledge in me that Seraph on earth named Genius."

"My glorious Bridegroom! true Dayspring from on high! All I would have
at last I possess. I receive a revelation. The dark hint, the obscure
whisper, which have haunted me from childhood, are interpreted. Thou art
He I sought. Godborn, take me, thy bride!"

"Unhumbled, I can take what is mine. Did I not give from the altar the
very flame which lit Eva's being? Come again into the heaven whence thou
wert sent."

That Presence, invisible but mighty, gathered her in like a lamb to the
fold; that voice, soft but all-pervading, vibrated through her heart
like music. Her eye received no image; and yet a sense visited her
vision and her brain as of the serenity of stainless air, the power of
sovereign seas, the majesty of marching stars, the energy of colliding
elements, the rooted endurance of hills wide based, and, above all, as
of the lustre of heroic beauty rushing victorious on the Night,
vanquishing its shadows like a diviner sun.

Such was the bridal hour of Genius and Humanity. Who shall rehearse the
tale of their after-union? Who shall depict its bliss and bale? Who
shall tell how He between whom and the Woman God put enmity forged
deadly plots to break the bond or defile its purity? Who shall record
the long strife between Serpent and Seraph:--How still the Father of
Lies insinuated evil into good, pride into wisdom, grossness into glory,
pain into bliss, poison into passion? How the "dreadless Angel" defied,
resisted, and repelled? How again and again he refined the polluted cup,
exalted the debased emotion, rectified the perverted impulse, detected
the lurking venom, baffled the frontless temptation--purified,
justified, watched, and withstood? How, by his patience, by his
strength, by that unutterable excellence he held from God--his
Origin--this faithful Seraph fought for Humanity a good fight through
time; and, when Time's course closed, and Death was encountered at the
end, barring with fleshless arm the portals of Eternity, how Genius
still held close his dying bride, sustained her through the agony of the
passage, bore her triumphant into his own home, Heaven; restored her,
redeemed, to Jehovah, her Maker; and at last, before Angel and
Archangel, crowned her with the crown of Immortality?

Who shall of these things write the chronicle?

       *       *       *       *       *

"I never could correct that composition," observed Shirley, as Moore
concluded. "Your censor-pencil scored it with condemnatory lines, whose
signification I strove vainly to fathom."

She had taken a crayon from the tutor's desk, and was drawing little
leaves, fragments of pillars, broken crosses, on the margin of the book.

"French may be half forgotten, but the habits of the French lesson are
retained, I see," said Louis. "My books would now, as erst, be unsafe
with you. My newly-bound St. Pierre would soon be like my Racine--Miss
Keeldar, her mark, traced on every page."

Shirley dropped her crayon as if it burned her fingers.

"Tell me what were the faults of that _devoir_?" she asked. "Were they
grammatical errors, or did you object to the substance?"

"I never said that the lines I drew were indications of faults at all.
You would have it that such was the case, and I refrained from
contradiction."

"What else did they denote?"

"No matter now."

"Mr. Moore," cried Henry, "make Shirley repeat some of the pieces she
used to say so well by heart."

"If I ask for any, it will be 'Le Cheval Dompté,'" said Moore, trimming
with his penknife the pencil Miss Keeldar had worn to a stump.

She turned aside her head; the neck, the clear cheek, forsaken by their
natural veil, were seen to flush warm.

"Ah! she has not forgotten, you see, sir," said Henry, exultant. "She
knows how naughty she was."

A smile, which Shirley would not permit to expand, made her lip tremble;
she bent her face, and hid it half with her arms, half in her curls,
which, as she stooped, fell loose again. "Certainly I was a rebel," she
answered.

"A rebel!" repeated Henry. "Yes; you and papa had quarrelled terribly,
and you set both him and mamma, and Mrs. Pryor, and everybody, at
defiance. You said he had insulted you----"

"He _had_ insulted me," interposed Shirley.

"And you wanted to leave Sympson Grove directly. You packed your things
up, and papa threw them out of your trunk; mamma cried, Mrs. Pryor
cried; they both stood wringing their hands begging you to be patient;
and you knelt on the floor with your things and your up-turned box
before you, looking, Shirley, looking--why, in one of _your_ passions.
Your features, in such passions, are not distorted; they are fixed, but
quite beautiful. You scarcely look angry, only resolute, and in a
certain haste; yet one feels that at such times an obstacle cast across
your path would be split as with lightning. Papa lost heart, and called
Mr. Moore."

"Enough, Henry."

"No, it is not enough. I hardly know how Mr. Moore managed, except that
I recollect he suggested to papa that agitation would bring on his gout;
and then he spoke quietly to the ladies, and got them away; and
afterwards he said to you, Miss Shirley, that it was of no use talking
or lecturing now, but that the tea-things were just brought into the
schoolroom, and he was very thirsty, and he would be glad if you would
leave your packing for the present and come and make a cup of tea for
him and me. You came; you would not talk at first, but soon you softened
and grew cheerful. Mr. Moore began to tell us about the Continent, the
war, and Bonaparte--subjects we were both fond of listening to. After
tea he said we should neither of us leave him that evening; he would not
let us stray out of his sight, lest we should again get into mischief.
We sat one on each side of him. We were so happy. I never passed so
pleasant an evening. The next day he gave you, missy, a lecture of an
hour, and wound it up by marking you a piece to learn in Bossuet as a
punishment-lesson--'Le Cheval Dompté.' You learned it instead of packing
up, Shirley. We heard no more of your running away. Mr. Moore used to
tease you on the subject for a year afterwards."

"She never said a lesson with greater spirit," subjoined Moore. "She
then, for the first time, gave me the treat of hearing my native tongue
spoken without accent by an English girl."

"She was as sweet as summer cherries for a month afterwards," struck in
Henry: "a good hearty quarrel always left Shirley's temper better than
it found it."

"You talk of me as if I were not present," observed Miss Keeldar, who
had not yet lifted her face.

"Are you sure you _are_ present?" asked Moore. "There have been moments
since my arrival here when I have been tempted to inquire of the lady of
Fieldhead if she knew what had become of my former pupil."

"She is here now."

"I see her, and humble enough; but I would neither advise Harry nor
others to believe too implicitly in the humility which one moment can
hide its blushing face like a modest little child, and the next lift it
pale and lofty as a marble Juno."

"One man in times of old, it is said, imparted vitality to the statue he
had chiselled; others may have the contrary gift of turning life to
stone."

Moore paused on this observation before he replied to it. His look, at
once struck and meditative, said, "A strange phrase; what may it mean?"
He turned it over in his mind, with thought deep and slow, as some
German pondering metaphysics.

"You mean," he said at last, "that some men inspire repugnance, and so
chill the kind heart."

"Ingenious!" responded Shirley. "If the interpretation pleases you, you
are welcome to hold it valid. _I_ don't care."

And with that she raised her head, lofty in look and statue-like in hue,
as Louis had described it.

"Behold the metamorphosis!" he said; "scarce imagined ere it is
realized: a lowly nymph develops to an inaccessible goddess. But Henry
must not be disappointed of his recitation, and Olympia will deign to
oblige him. Let us begin."

"I have forgotten the very first line."

"Which I have not. _My_ memory, if a slow, is a retentive one. I acquire
deliberately both knowledge and liking. The acquisition grows into my
brain, and the sentiment into my breast; and it is not as the
rapid-springing produce which, having no root in itself, flourishes
verdurous enough for a time, but too soon falls withered away.
Attention, Henry! Miss Keeldar consents to favour you. 'Voyez ce cheval
ardent et impétueux,' so it commences."

Miss Keeldar did consent to make the effort; but she soon stopped.

"Unless I heard the whole repeated I cannot continue it," she said.

"Yet it was quickly learned--'soon gained, soon gone,'" moralized the
tutor. He recited the passage deliberately, accurately, with slow,
impressive emphasis.

Shirley, by degrees, inclined her ear as he went on. Her face, before
turned from him, _re_turned towards him. When he ceased, she took the
word up as if from his lips; she took his very tone; she seized his very
accent; she delivered the periods as he had delivered them; she
reproduced his manner, his pronunciation, his expression.

It was now her turn to petition.

"Recall 'Le Songe d'Athalie,'" she entreated, "and say it."

He said it for her. She took it from him; she found lively excitement in
the pleasure of making his language her own. She asked for further
indulgence; all the old school pieces were revived, and with them
Shirley's old school days.

He had gone through some of the best passages of Racine and Corneille,
and then had heard the echo of his own deep tones in the girl's voice,
that modulated itself faithfully on his. "Le chêne et le Roseau," that
most beautiful of La Fontaine's fables, had been recited, well recited,
by the tutor, and the pupil had animatedly availed herself of the
lesson. Perhaps a simultaneous feeling seized them now, that their
enthusiasm had kindled to a glow, which the slight fuel of French poetry
no longer sufficed to feed; perhaps they longed for a trunk of English
oak to be thrown as a Yule log to the devouring flame. Moore observed,
"And these are our best pieces! And we have nothing more dramatic,
nervous, natural!"

And then he smiled and was silent. His whole nature seemed serenely
alight. He stood on the hearth, leaning his elbow on the mantelpiece,
musing not unblissfully.

Twilight was closing on the diminished autumn day. The schoolroom
windows--darkened with creeping plants, from which no high October winds
had as yet swept the sere foliage--admitted scarce a gleam of sky; but
the fire gave light enough to talk by.

And now Louis Moore addressed his pupil in French, and she answered at
first with laughing hesitation and in broken phrase. Moore encouraged
while he corrected her. Henry joined in the lesson; the two scholars
stood opposite the master, their arms round each other's waists. Tartar,
who long since had craved and obtained admission, sat sagely in the
centre of the rug, staring at the blaze which burst fitful from morsels
of coal among the red cinders. The group were happy enough, but--

    "Pleasures are like poppies spread;
     You seize the flower--its bloom is shed."

The dull, rumbling sound of wheels was heard on the pavement in the
yard.

"It is the carriage returned," said Shirley; "and dinner must be just
ready, and I am not dressed."

A servant came in with Mr. Moore's candle and tea; for the tutor and his
pupil usually dined at luncheon time.

"Mr. Sympson and the ladies are returned," she said, "and Sir Philip
Nunnely is with them."

"How you did start, and how your hand trembled, Shirley!" said Henry,
when the maid had closed the shutter and was gone. "But I know
why--don't you, Mr. Moore? I know what papa intends. He is a little ugly
man, that Sir Philip. I wish he had not come. I wish sisters and all of
them had stayed at De Walden Hall to dine.--Shirley should once more
have made tea for you and me, Mr. Moore, and we would have had a happy
evening of it."

Moore was locking up his desk and putting away his St. Pierre. "That was
_your_ plan, was it, my boy?"

"Don't you approve it, sir?"

"I approve nothing utopian. Look Life in its iron face; stare Reality
out of its brassy countenance. Make the tea, Henry; I shall be back in a
minute."

He left the room; so did Shirley, by another door.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

PHŒBE.


Shirley probably got on pleasantly with Sir Philip that evening, for the
next morning she came down in one of her best moods.

"Who will take a walk with me?" she asked, after breakfast. "Isabella
and Gertrude, will you?"

So rare was such an invitation from Miss Keeldar to her female cousins
that they hesitated before they accepted it. Their mamma, however,
signifying acquiescence in the project, they fetched their bonnets, and
the trio set out.

It did not suit these three young persons to be thrown much together.
Miss Keeldar liked the society of few ladies; indeed, she had a cordial
pleasure in that of none except Mrs. Pryor and Caroline Helstone. She
was civil, kind, attentive even to her cousins; but still she usually
had little to say to them. In the sunny mood of this particular morning,
she contrived to entertain even the Misses Sympson. Without deviating
from her wonted rule of discussing with them only ordinary themes, she
imparted to these themes an extraordinary interest; the sparkle of her
spirit glanced along her phrases.

What made her so joyous? All the cause must have been in herself. The
day was not bright. It was dim--a pale, waning autumn day. The walks
through the dun woods were damp; the atmosphere was heavy, the sky
overcast; and yet it seemed that in Shirley's heart lived all the light
and azure of Italy, as all its fervour laughed in her gray English eye.

Some directions necessary to be given to her foreman, John, delayed her
behind her cousins as they neared Fieldhead on their return. Perhaps an
interval of twenty minutes elapsed between her separation from them and
her re-entrance into the house. In the meantime she had spoken to John,
and then she had lingered in the lane at the gate. A summons to
luncheon called her in. She excused herself from the meal, and went
upstairs.

"Is not Shirley coming to luncheon?" asked Isabella. "She said she was
hungry."

An hour after, as she did not quit her chamber, one of her cousins went
to seek her there. She was found sitting at the foot of the bed, her
head resting on her hand; she looked quite pale, very thoughtful, almost
sad.

"You are not ill?" was the question put.

"A little sick," replied Miss Keeldar.

Certainly she was not a little changed from what she had been two hours
before.

This change, accounted for only by those three words, explained no
otherwise; this change--whencesoever springing, effected in a brief ten
minutes--passed like no light summer cloud. She talked when she joined
her friends at dinner, talked as usual. She remained with them during
the evening. When again questioned respecting her health, she declared
herself perfectly recovered. It had been a mere passing faintness, a
momentary sensation, not worth a thought; yet it was felt there was a
difference in Shirley.

The next day--the day, the week, the fortnight after--this new and
peculiar shadow lingered on the countenance, in the manner of Miss
Keeldar. A strange quietude settled over her look, her movements, her
very voice. The alteration was not so marked as to court or permit
frequent questioning, yet it _was_ there, and it would not pass away. It
hung over her like a cloud which no breeze could stir or disperse. Soon
it became evident that to notice this change was to annoy her. First she
shrank from remark; and, if persisted in, she, with her own peculiar
_hauteur_, repelled it. "Was she ill?" The reply came with decision.

"I _am not_."

"Did anything weigh on her mind? Had anything happened to affect her
spirits?"

She scornfully ridiculed the idea. "What did they mean by spirits? She
had no spirits, black or white, blue or gray, to affect."

"Something must be the matter--she was so altered."

"She supposed she had a right to alter at her ease. She knew she was
plainer. If it suited her to grow ugly, why need others fret themselves
on the subject?"

"There must be a cause for the change. What was it?"

She peremptorily requested to be let alone.

Then she would make every effort to appear quite gay, and she seemed
indignant at herself that she could not perfectly succeed. Brief
self-spurning epithets burst from her lips when alone. "Fool! coward!"
she would term herself. "Poltroon!" she would say, "if you must tremble,
tremble in secret! Quail where no eye sees you!"

"How dare you," she would ask herself--"how dare you show your weakness
and betray your imbecile anxieties? Shake them off; rise above them. If
you cannot do this, hide them."

And to hide them she did her best. She once more became resolutely
lively in company. When weary of effort and forced to relax, she sought
solitude--not the solitude of her chamber (she refused to mope, shut up
between four walls), but that wilder solitude which lies out of doors,
and which she could chase, mounted on Zoë, her mare. She took long rides
of half a day. Her uncle disapproved, but he dared not remonstrate. It
was never pleasant to face Shirley's anger, even when she was healthy
and gay; but now that her face showed thin, and her large eye looked
hollow, there was something in the darkening of that face and kindling
of that eye which touched as well as alarmed.

To all comparative strangers who, unconscious of the alterations in her
spirits, commented on the alteration in her looks, she had one reply,--

"I am perfectly well; I have not an ailment."

And health, indeed, she must have had, to be able to bear the exposure
to the weather she now encountered. Wet or fair, calm or storm, she took
her daily ride over Stilbro' Moor, Tartar keeping up at her side, with
his wolf-like gallop, long and untiring.

Twice, three times, the eyes of gossips--those eyes which are
everywhere, in the closet and on the hill-top--noticed that instead of
turning on Rushedge, the top ridge of Stilbro' Moor, she rode forwards
all the way to the town. Scouts were not wanting to mark her destination
there. It was ascertained that she alighted at the door of one Mr.
Pearson Hall, a solicitor, related to the vicar of Nunnely. This
gentleman and his ancestors had been the agents of the Keeldar family
for generations back. Some people affirmed that Miss Keeldar was become
involved in business speculations connected with Hollow's Mill--that she
had lost money, and was constrained to mortgage her land. Others
conjectured that she was going to be married, and that the settlements
were preparing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Moore and Henry Sympson were together in the schoolroom. The tutor
was waiting for a lesson which the pupil seemed busy in preparing.

"Henry, make haste. The afternoon is getting on."

"Is it, sir?"

"Certainly. Are you nearly ready with that lesson?"

"No."

"Not _nearly_ ready?"

"I have not construed a line."

Mr. Moore looked up. The boy's tone was rather peculiar.

"The task presents no difficulties, Henry; or, if it does, bring them to
me. We will work together."

"Mr. Moore, I can do no work."

"My boy, you are ill."

"Sir, I am not worse in bodily health than usual, but my heart is full."

"Shut the book. Come hither, Harry. Come to the fireside."

Harry limped forward. His tutor placed him in a chair; his lips were
quivering, his eyes brimming. He laid his crutch on the floor, bent down
his head, and wept.

"This distress is not occasioned by physical pain, you say, Harry? You
have a grief; tell it me."

"Sir, I have such a grief as I never had before. I wish it could be
relieved in some way; I can hardly bear it."

"Who knows but, if we talk it over, we may relieve it? What is the
cause? Whom does it concern?"

"The cause, sir, is Shirley; it concerns Shirley."

"Does it? You think her changed?"

"All who know her think her changed--you too, Mr. Moore."

"Not seriously--no. I see no alteration but such as a favourable turn
might repair in a few weeks; besides, her own word must go for
something: she says she is well."

"There it is, sir. As long as she maintained she was well, I believed
her. When I was sad out of her sight, I soon recovered spirits in her
presence. Now----"

"Well, Harry, now. Has she said anything to you? You and she were
together in the garden two hours this morning. I saw her talking, and
you listening. Now, my dear Harry, if Miss Keeldar has said she is ill,
and enjoined you to keep her secret, do not obey her. For her life's
sake, avow everything. Speak, my boy."

"_She_ say she is ill! I believe, sir, if she were dying, she would
smile, and aver, 'Nothing ails me.'"

"What have you learned then? What new circumstance?"

"I have learned that she has just made her will."

"Made her will?"

The tutor and pupil were silent.

"She told you that?" asked Moore, when some minutes had elapsed.

"She told me quite cheerfully, not as an ominous circumstance, which I
felt it to be. She said I was the only person besides her solicitor,
Pearson Hall, and Mr. Helstone and Mr. Yorke, who knew anything about
it; and to me, she intimated, she wished specially to explain its
provisions."

"Go on, Harry."

"'Because,' she said, looking down on me with her beautiful eyes--oh!
they _are_ beautiful, Mr. Moore! I love them! I love her! She is my
star! Heaven must not claim her! She is lovely in this world, and fitted
for this world. Shirley is not an angel; she is a woman, and she shall
live with men. Seraphs shall not have her! Mr. Moore, if one of the
'sons of God,' with wings wide and bright as the sky, blue and sounding
as the sea, having seen that she was fair, descended to claim her, his
claim should be withstood--withstood by me--boy and cripple as I am."

"Henry Sympson, go on, when I tell you."

"'Because,' she said, 'if I made no will, and died before you, Harry,
all my property would go to you; and I do not intend that it should be
so, though your father would like it. But you,' she said, 'will have his
whole estate, which is large--larger than Fieldhead. Your sisters will
have nothing; so I have left them some money, though I do not love them,
both together, half so much as I love one lock of your fair hair.' She
said these words, and she called me her 'darling,' and let me kiss her.
She went on to tell me that she had left Caroline Helstone some money
too; that this manor house, with its furniture and books, she had
bequeathed to me, as she did not choose to take the old family place
from her own blood; and that all the rest of her property, amounting to
about twelve thousand pounds, exclusive of the legacies to my sisters
and Miss Helstone, she had willed, not to me, seeing I was already rich,
but to a good man, who would make the best use of it that any human
being could do--a man, she said, that was both gentle and brave, strong
and merciful--a man that might not profess to be pious, but she knew he
had the secret of religion pure and undefiled before God. The spirit of
love and peace was with him. He visited the fatherless and widows in
their affliction, and kept himself unspotted from the world. Then she
asked, 'Do you approve what I have done, Harry?' I could not answer. My
tears choked me, as they do now."

Mr. Moore allowed his pupil a moment to contend with and master his
emotion. He then demanded, "What else did she say?"

"When I had signified my full consent to the conditions of her will, she
told me I was a generous boy, and she was proud of me. 'And now,' she
added, 'in case anything should happen, you will know what to say to
Malice when she comes whispering hard things in your ear, insinuating
that Shirley has wronged you, that she did not love you. You will know
that I _did_ love you, Harry; that no sister could have loved you
better--my own treasure.' Mr. Moore, sir, when I remember her voice, and
recall her look, my heart beats as if it would break its strings. She
_may_ go to heaven before me--if God commands it, she _must_; but the
rest of my life--and my life will not be long, I am glad of that
now--shall be a straight, quick, thoughtful journey in the path her step
has pressed. I thought to enter the vault of the Keeldars before her.
Should it be otherwise, lay my coffin by Shirley's side."

Moore answered him with a weighty calm, that offered a strange contrast
to the boy's perturbed enthusiasm.

"You are wrong, both of you--you harm each other. If youth once falls
under the influence of a shadowy terror, it imagines there will never be
full sunlight again; its first calamity it fancies will last a lifetime.
What more did she say? Anything more?"

"We settled one or two family points between ourselves."

"I should rather like to know what----"

"But, Mr. Moore, you smile. _I_ could not smile to see Shirley in such a
mood."

"My boy, I am neither nervous, nor poetic, nor inexperienced. I see
things as they are; you don't as yet. Tell me these family points."

"Only, sir, she asked me whether I considered myself most of a Keeldar
or a Sympson; and I answered I was Keeldar to the core of the heart and
to the marrow of the bones. She said she was glad of it; for, besides
her, I was the only Keeldar left in England. And then we agreed on some
matters."

"Well?"

"Well, sir, that if I lived to inherit my father's estate, and her
house, I was to take the name of Keeldar, and to make Fieldhead my
residence. Henry Shirley Keeldar I said I would be called; and I will.
Her name and her manor house are ages old, and Sympson and Sympson Grove
are of yesterday."

"Come, you are neither of you going to heaven yet. I have the best hopes
of you both, with your proud distinctions--a pair of half-fledged
eaglets. Now, what is your inference from all you have told me? Put it
into words."

"That Shirley thinks she is going to die."

"She referred to her health?"

"Not once; but I assure you she is wasting. Her hands are grown quite
thin, and so is her cheek."

"Does she ever complain to your mother or sisters?"

"Never. She laughs at them when they question her. Mr. Moore, she is a
strange being, so fair and girlish--not a man-like woman at all, not an
Amazon, and yet lifting her head above both help and sympathy."

"Do you know where she is now, Henry? Is she in the house, or riding
out?"

"Surely not out, sir. It rains fast."

"True; which, however, is no guarantee that she is not at this moment
cantering over Rushedge. Of late she has never permitted weather to be a
hindrance to her rides."

"You remember, Mr. Moore, how wet and stormy it was last Wednesday--so
wild, indeed, that she would not permit Zoë to be saddled? Yet the blast
she thought too tempestuous for her mare she herself faced on foot; that
afternoon she walked nearly as far as Nunnely. I asked her, when she
came in, if she was not afraid of taking cold. 'Not I,' she said. 'It
would be too much good luck for me. I don't know, Harry, but the best
thing that could happen to me would be to take a good cold and fever,
and so pass off like other Christians.' She is reckless, you see, sir."

"Reckless indeed! Go and find out where she is, and if you can get an
opportunity of speaking to her without attracting attention, request her
to come here a minute."

"Yes, sir."

He snatched his crutch, and started up to go.

"Harry!"

He returned.

"Do not deliver the message formally. Word it as, in former days, you
would have worded an ordinary summons to the schoolroom."

"I see, sir. She will be more likely to obey."

"And, Harry----"
