
"Sir?"

"I will call you when I want you. Till then, you are dispensed from
lessons."

He departed. Mr. Moore, left alone, rose from his desk.

"I can be very cool and very supercilious with Henry," he said. "I can
seem to make light of his apprehensions, and look down _du haut de ma
grandeur_ on his youthful ardour. To _him_ I can speak as if, in my
eyes, they were both children. Let me see if I can keep up the same rôle
with her. I have known the moment when I seemed about to forget it, when
Confusion and Submission seemed about to crush me with their soft
tyranny, when my tongue faltered, and I have almost let the mantle drop,
and stood in her presence, not master--no--but something else. I trust I
shall never so play the fool. It is well for a Sir Philip Nunnely to
redden when he meets her eye. He may permit himself the indulgence of
submission. He may even, without disgrace, suffer his hand to tremble
when it touches hers; but if one of her farmers were to show himself
susceptible and sentimental, he would merely prove his need of a strait
waistcoat. So far I have always done very well. She has sat near me, and
I have not shaken--more than my desk. I have encountered her looks and
smiles like--why, like a tutor, as I am. Her hand I never yet
touched--never underwent that test. Her farmer or her footman I am
not--no serf nor servant of hers have I ever been; but I am poor, and it
behoves me to look to my self-respect--not to compromise an inch of it.
What did she mean by that allusion to the cold people who petrify flesh
to marble? It pleased me--I hardly know why; I would not permit myself
to inquire. I never do indulge in scrutiny either of her language or
countenance; for if I did, I should sometimes forget common sense and
believe in romance. A strange, secret ecstasy steals through my veins at
moments. I'll not encourage--I'll not remember it. I am resolved, as
long as may be, to retain the right to say with Paul, 'I am not mad, but
speak forth the words of truth and soberness.'"

He paused, listening.

"Will she come, or will she not come?" he inquired. "How will she take
the message? Naïvely or disdainfully? Like a child or like a queen? Both
characters are in her nature.

"If she comes, what shall I say to her? How account, firstly, for the
freedom of the request? Shall I apologize to her? I could in all
humility; but would an apology tend to place us in the positions we
ought relatively to occupy in this matter? I _must_ keep up the
professor, otherwise---- I hear a door."

He waited. Many minutes passed.

"She will refuse me. Henry is entreating her to come; she declines. My
petition is presumption in her eyes. Let her _only_ come, I can teach
her to the contrary. I would rather she were a little perverse; it will
steel me. I prefer her cuirassed in pride, armed with a taunt. Her scorn
startles me from my dreams; I stand up myself. A sarcasm from her eyes
or lips puts strength into every nerve and sinew I have. Some step
approaches, and not Henry's."

The door unclosed; Miss Keeldar came in. The message, it appeared, had
found her at her needle; she brought her work in her hand. That day she
had not been riding out; she had evidently passed it quietly. She wore
her neat indoor dress and silk apron. This was no Thalestris from the
fields, but a quiet domestic character from the fireside. Mr. Moore had
her at advantage. He should have addressed her at once in solemn
accents, and with rigid mien. Perhaps he would, had she looked saucy;
but her air never showed less of _crânerie_. A soft kind of youthful
shyness depressed her eyelid and mantled on her cheek. The tutor stood
silent.

She made a full stop between the door and his desk.

"Did you want me, sir?" she asked.

"I ventured, Miss Keeldar, to send for you--that is, to ask an interview
of a few minutes."

She waited; she plied her needle.

"Well, sir" (not lifting her eyes), "what about?"

"Be seated first. The subject I would broach is one of some moment.
Perhaps I have hardly a right to approach it. It is possible I ought to
frame an apology; it is possible no apology can excuse me. The liberty I
have taken arises from a conversation with Henry. The boy is unhappy
about your health; all your friends are unhappy on that subject. It is
of your health I would speak."

"I am quite well," she said briefly.

"Yet changed."

"That matters to none but myself. We all change."

"Will you sit down? Formerly, Miss Keeldar, I had some influence with
you: have I any now? May I feel that what I am saying is not accounted
positive presumption?"

"Let me read some French, Mr. Moore, or I will even take a spell at the
Latin grammar, and let us proclaim a truce to all sanitary discussions."

"No, no. It is time there were discussions."

"Discuss away, then, but do not choose me for your text. I am a healthy
subject."

"Do you not think it wrong to affirm and reaffirm what is substantially
untrue?"

"I say I am well. I have neither cough, pain, nor fever."

"Is there no equivocation in that assertion? Is it the direct truth?"

"The direct truth."

Louis Moore looked at her earnestly.

"I can myself," he said, "trace no indications of actual disease. But
why, then, are you altered?"

"_Am_ I altered?"

"We will try. We will seek a proof."

"How?"

"I ask, in the first place, do you sleep as you used to?"

"I do not; but it is not because I am ill."

"Have you the appetite you once had?"

"No; but it is not because I am ill."

"You remember this little ring fastened to my watch-chain? It was my
mother's, and is too small to pass the joint of my little finger. You
have many a time sportively purloined it. It fitted your fore-finger.
Try now."

She permitted the test. The ring dropped from the wasted little hand.
Louis picked it up, and reattached it to the chain. An uneasy flush
coloured his brow. Shirley again said, "It is not because I am ill."

"Not only have you lost sleep, appetite, and flesh," proceeded Moore,
"but your spirits are always at ebb. Besides, there is a nervous alarm
in your eye, a nervous disquiet in your manner. These peculiarities were
not formerly yours."

"Mr. Moore, we will pause here. You have exactly hit it. I am nervous.
Now, talk of something else. What wet weather we have--steady, pouring
rain!"

"_You_ nervous? Yes; and if Miss Keeldar is nervous, it is not without a
cause. Let me reach it. Let me look nearer. The ailment is not physical.
I have suspected that. It came in one moment. I know the day. I noticed
the change. Your pain is mental."

"Not at all. It is nothing so dignified--merely nervous. Oh! dismiss the
topic."

"When it is exhausted; not till then. Nervous alarms should always be
communicated, that they may be dissipated. I wish I had the gift of
persuasion, and could incline you to speak willingly. I believe
confession, in your case, would be half equivalent to cure."

"No," said Shirley abruptly. "I wish that were at all probable; but I am
afraid it is not."

She suspended her work a moment. She was now seated. Resting her elbow
on the table, she leaned her head on her hand. Mr. Moore looked as if he
felt he had at last gained some footing in this difficult path. She was
serious, and in her wish was implied an important admission; after that
she could no longer affirm that _nothing_ ailed her.

The tutor allowed her some minutes for repose and reflection ere he
returned to the charge. Once his lips moved to speak, but he thought
better of it, and prolonged the pause. Shirley lifted her eye to his.
Had he betrayed injudicious emotion, perhaps obstinate persistence in
silence would have been the result; but he looked calm, strong,
trustworthy.

"I had better tell _you_ than my aunt," she said, "or than my cousins,
or my uncle. They would all make such a bustle, and it is that very
bustle I dread--the alarm, the flurry, the _éclat_. In short, I never
liked to be the centre of a small domestic whirlpool. You can bear a
little shock--eh?"

"A great one, if necessary."

Not a muscle of the man's frame moved, and yet his large heart beat fast
in his deep chest. What was she going to tell him? Was irremediable
mischief done?

"Had I thought it right to go to you, I would never have made a secret
of the matter one moment," she continued. "I would have told you at
once, and asked advice."

"Why was it not right to come to me?"

"It might be _right_--I do not mean that; but I could not do it. I
seemed to have no title to trouble you. The mishap concerned me only. I
wanted to keep it to myself, and people will not let me. I tell you, I
hate to be an object of worrying attention, or a theme for village
gossip. Besides, it may pass away without result--God knows!"

Moore, though tortured with suspense, did not demand a quick
explanation. He suffered neither gesture, glance, nor word to betray
impatience. His tranquillity tranquillized Shirley; his confidence
reassured her.

"Great effects may spring from trivial causes," she remarked, as she
loosened a bracelet from her wrist. Then, unfastening her sleeve, and
partially turning it up, "Look here, Mr. Moore."

She showed a mark in her white arm--rather a deep though healed-up
indentation--something between a burn and a cut.

"I would not show that to any one in Briarfield but you, because you can
take it quietly."

"Certainly there is nothing in the little mark to shock. Its history
will explain."

"Small as it is, it has taken my sleep away, and made me nervous, thin,
and foolish; because, on account of that little mark, I am obliged to
look forward to a possibility that has its terrors."

The sleeve was readjusted, the bracelet replaced.

"Do you know that you try me?" he said, smiling. "I am a patient sort of
man, but my pulse is quickening."

"Whatever happens, you will befriend me, Mr. Moore? You will give me the
benefit of your self-possession, and not leave me at the mercy of
agitated cowards?"

"I make no promise now. Tell me the tale, and then exact what pledge you
will."

"It is a very short tale. I took a walk with Isabella and Gertrude one
day, about three weeks ago. They reached home before me; I stayed behind
to speak to John. After leaving him, I pleased myself with lingering in
the lane, where all was very still and shady. I was tired of chattering
to the girls, and in no hurry to rejoin them. As I stood leaning against
the gate-pillar, thinking some very happy thoughts about my future
life--for that morning I imagined that events were beginning to turn as
I had long wished them to turn----"

"Ah! Nunnely had been with her the evening before!" thought Moore
parenthetically.

"I heard a panting sound; a dog came running up the lane. I know most of
the dogs in this neighbourhood. It was Phœbe, one of Mr. Sam Wynne's
pointers. The poor creature ran with her head down, her tongue hanging
out; she looked as if bruised and beaten all over. I called her. I meant
to coax her into the house and give her some water and dinner. I felt
sure she had been ill-used. Mr. Sam often flogs his pointers cruelly.
She was too flurried to know me; and when I attempted to pat her head,
she turned and snatched at my arm. She bit it so as to draw blood, then
ran panting on. Directly after, Mr. Wynne's keeper came up, carrying a
gun. He asked if I had seen a dog. I told him I had seen Phœbe.

"'You had better chain up Tartar, ma'am,' he said, 'and tell your people
to keep within the house. I am after Phœbe to shoot her, and the groom
is gone another way. She is raging mad.'"

Mr. Moore leaned back in his chair and folded his arms across his chest.
Miss Keeldar resumed her square of silk canvas, and continued the
creation of a wreath of Parmese violets.

"And you told no one, sought no help, no cure? You would not come to
me?"

"I got as far as the schoolroom door; there my courage failed. I
preferred to cushion the matter."

"Why? What can I demand better in this world than to be of use to you?"

"I had no claim."

"Monstrous! And you did nothing?"

"Yes. I walked straight into the laundry, where they are ironing most of
the week, now that I have so many guests in the house. While the maid
was busy crimping or starching, I took an Italian iron from the fire,
and applied the light scarlet glowing tip to my arm. I bored it well
in. It cauterized the little wound. Then I went upstairs."

"I dare say you never once groaned?"

"I am sure I don't know. I was very miserable--not firm or tranquil at
all, I think. There was no calm in my mind."

"There was calm in your person. I remember listening the whole time we
sat at luncheon, to hear if you moved in the room above. All was quiet."

"I was sitting at the foot of the bed, wishing Phœbe had not bitten
me."

"And alone. You like solitude."

"Pardon me."

"You disdain sympathy."

"Do I, Mr. Moore?"

"With your powerful mind you must feel independent of help, of advice,
of society."

"So be it, since it pleases you."

She smiled. She pursued her embroidery carefully and quickly, but her
eyelash twinkled, and then it glittered, and then a drop fell.

Mr. Moore leaned forward on his desk, moved his chair, altered his
attitude.

"If it is not so," he asked, with a peculiar, mellow change in his
voice, "how is it, then?"

"I don't know."

"You do know, but you won't speak. All must be locked up in yourself."

"Because it is not worth sharing."

"Because nobody can give the high price you require for your confidence.
Nobody is rich enough to purchase it. Nobody has the honour, the
intellect, the power you demand in your adviser. There is not a shoulder
in England on which you would rest your hand for support, far less a
bosom which you would permit to pillow your head. Of course you must
live alone."

"I _can_ live alone, if need be. But the question is not how to live,
but how to die alone. That strikes me in a more grisly light."

"You apprehend the effects of the virus? You anticipate an indefinitely
threatening, dreadful doom?"

She bowed.

"You are very nervous and womanish."

"You complimented me two minutes since on my powerful mind."

"You are very womanish. If the whole affair were coolly examined and
discussed, I feel assured it would turn out that there is no danger of
your dying at all."

"Amen! I am very willing to live, if it please God. I have felt life
sweet."

"How can it be otherwise than sweet with your endowments and nature? Do
you truly expect that you will be seized with hydrophobia, and die
raving mad?"

"I _expect_ it, and have _feared_ it. Just now I fear nothing."

"Nor do I, on your account. I doubt whether the smallest particle of
virus mingled with your blood; and if it did, let me assure you that,
young, healthy, faultlessly sound as you are, no harm will ensue. For
the rest, I shall inquire whether the dog was really mad. I hold she was
not mad."

"Tell nobody that she bit me."

"Why should I, when I believe the bite innocuous as a cut of this
penknife? Make yourself easy. _I_ am easy, though I value your life as
much as I do my own chance of happiness in eternity. Look up."

"Why, Mr. Moore?"

"I wish to see if you are cheered. Put your work down; raise your head."

"There----"

"Look at me. Thank you. And is the cloud broken?"

"I fear nothing."

"Is your mind restored to its own natural sunny clime?"

"I am very content; but I want your promise."

"Dictate."

"You know, in case the worst I _have_ feared should happen, they will
smother me. You need not smile. They will; they always do. My uncle will
be full of horror, weakness, precipitation; and that is the only
expedient which will suggest itself to him. Nobody in the house will be
self-possessed but you. Now promise to befriend me--to keep Mr. Sympson
away from me, not to let Henry come near, lest I should hurt him.
Mind--_mind_ that you take care of yourself too. But I shall not injure
you; I know I shall not. Lock the chamber door against the surgeons;
turn them out if they get in. Let neither the young nor the old MacTurk
lay a finger on me; nor Mr. Greaves, their colleague; and lastly, if I
give trouble, with your own hand administer to me a strong
narcotic--such a sure dose of laudanum as shall leave no mistake.
_Promise to do this._"

Moore left his desk, and permitted himself the recreation of one or two
turns through the room. Stopping behind Shirley's chair, he bent over
her, and said, in a low, emphatic voice, "I promise all you ask--without
comment, without reservation."

"If female help is needed, call in my housekeeper, Mrs. Gill. Let her
lay me out if I die. She is attached to me. She wronged me again and
again, and again and again I forgave her. She now loves me, and would
not defraud me of a pin. Confidence has made her honest; forbearance has
made her kind-hearted. At this day I can trust both her integrity, her
courage, and her affection. Call her; but keep my good aunt and my timid
cousins away. Once more, promise."

"I promise."

"That is good in you," she said, looking up at him as he bent over her,
and smiling.

"Is it good? Does it comfort?"

"Very much."

"I will be with you--I and Mrs. Gill only--in any, in every extremity
where calm and fidelity are needed. No rash or coward hand shall
meddle."

"Yet you think me childish?"

"I do."

"Ah! you despise me."

"Do we despise children?"

"In fact, I am neither so strong, nor have I such pride in my strength,
as people think, Mr. Moore; nor am I so regardless of sympathy. But when
I have any grief, I fear to impart it to those I love, lest it should
pain them; and to those whom I view with indifference I cannot
condescend to complain. After all, you should not taunt me with being
childish, for if you were as unhappy as I have been for the last three
weeks, you too would want some friend."

"We all want a friend, do we not?"

"All of us that have anything good in our natures."

"Well, you have Caroline Helstone."

"Yes. And you have Mr. Hall."

"Yes. Mrs. Pryor is a wise, good woman. She can counsel you when you
need counsel."

"For your part, you have your brother Robert."

"For any right-hand defections, there is the Rev. Matthewson Helstone,
M.A., to lean upon; for any left-hand fallings-off there is Hiram Yorke,
Esq. Both elders pay you homage."

"I never saw Mrs. Yorke so motherly to any young man as she is to you. I
don't know how you have won her heart, but she is more tender to you
than she is to her own sons. You have, besides, your sister Hortense."

"It appears we are both well provided."

"It appears so."

"How thankful we ought to be!"

"Yes."

"How contented!"

"Yes."

"For my part, I am almost contented just now, and very thankful.
Gratitude is a divine emotion. It fills the heart, but not to bursting;
it warms it, but not to fever. I like to taste leisurely of bliss.
Devoured in haste, I do not know its flavour."

Still leaning on the back of Miss Keeldar's chair, Moore watched the
rapid motion of her fingers, as the green and purple garland grew
beneath them. After a prolonged pause, he again asked, "Is the shadow
_quite_ gone?"

"Wholly. As I _was_ two hours since, and as I _am_ now, are two
different states of existence. I believe, Mr. Moore, griefs and fears
nursed in silence grow like Titan infants."

"You will cherish such feelings no more in silence?"

"Not if I dare speak."

"In using the word '_dare_,' to whom do you allude?"

"To you."

"How is it applicable to me?"

"On account of your austerity and shyness."

"Why am I austere and shy?"

"Because you are proud."

"Why am I proud?"

"I should like to know. Will you be good enough to tell me?"

"Perhaps, because I am poor, for one reason. Poverty and pride often go
together."

"That is such a nice reason. I should be charmed to discover another
that would pair with it. Mate that turtle, Mr. Moore."

"Immediately. What do you think of marrying to sober Poverty many-tinted
Caprice?"

"Are you capricious?"

"_You_ are."

"A libel. I am steady as a rock, fixed as the polar star."

"I look out at some early hour of the day, and see a fine, perfect
rainbow, bright with promise, gloriously spanning the beclouded welkin
of life. An hour afterwards I look again: half the arch is gone, and the
rest is faded. Still later, the stern sky denies that it ever wore so
benign a symbol of hope."

"Well, Mr. Moore, you should contend against these changeful humours.
They are your besetting sin. One never knows where to have you."

"Miss Keeldar, I had once, for two years, a pupil who grew very dear to
me. Henry is dear, but she was dearer. Henry never gives me trouble;
she--well, she did. I think she vexed me twenty-three hours out of the
twenty-four----"

"She was never with you above three hours, or at the most six at a
time."

"She sometimes spilled the draught from my cup, and stole the food from
my plate; and when she had kept me unfed for a day (and that did not
suit me, for I am a man accustomed to take my meals with reasonable
relish, and to ascribe due importance to the rational enjoyment of
creature comforts)----"

"I know you do. I can tell what sort of dinners you like best--perfectly
well. I know precisely the dishes you prefer----"

"She robbed these dishes of flavour, and made a fool of me besides. I
like to sleep well. In my quiet days, when I was my own man, I never
quarrelled with the night for being long, nor cursed my bed for its
thorns. She changed all this."

"Mr. Moore----"

"And having taken from me peace of mind and ease of life, she took from
me herself--quite coolly, just as if, when she was gone, the world would
be all the same to me. I knew I should see her again at some time. At
the end of two years, it fell out that we encountered again under her
own roof, where she was mistress. How do you think she bore herself
towards me, Miss Keeldar?"

"Like one who had profited well by lessons learned from yourself."

"She received me haughtily. She meted out a wide space between us, and
kept me aloof by the reserved gesture, the rare and alienated glance,
the word calmly civil."

"She was an excellent pupil! Having seen you distant, she at once
learned to withdraw. Pray, sir, admire in her _hauteur_ a careful
improvement on your own coolness."

"Conscience, and honour, and the most despotic necessity dragged me
apart from her, and kept me sundered with ponderous fetters. She was
free: she might have been clement."

"Never free to compromise her self-respect, to seek where she had been
shunned."

"Then she was inconsistent; she tantalized as before. When I thought I
had made up my mind to seeing in her only a lofty stranger, she would
suddenly show me such a glimpse of loving simplicity--she would warm me
with such a beam of reviving sympathy, she would gladden an hour with
converse so gentle, gay, and kindly--that I could no more shut my heart
on her image than I could close that door against her presence. Explain
why she distressed me so."

"She could not bear to be quite outcast; and then she would sometimes
get a notion into her head, on a cold, wet day, that the schoolroom was
no cheerful place, and feel it incumbent on her to go and see if you and
Henry kept up a good fire; and once there, she liked to stay."

"But she should not be changeful. If she came at all, she should come
oftener."

"There is such a thing as intrusion."

"To-morrow you will not be as you are to-day."

"I don't know. Will you?"

"I am not mad, most noble Berenice! We may give one day to dreaming, but
the next we must awake; and I shall awake to purpose the morning you are
married to Sir Philip Nunnely. The fire shines on you and me, and shows
us very clearly in the glass, Miss Keeldar; and I have been gazing on
the picture all the time I have been talking. Look up! What a difference
between your head and mine! I look old for thirty!"

"You are so grave; you have such a square brow; and your face is sallow.
I never regard you as a young man, nor as Robert's junior."

"Don't you? I thought not. Imagine Robert's clear-cut, handsome face
looking over my shoulder. Does not the apparition make vividly manifest
the obtuse mould of my heavy traits? There!" (he started), "I have been
expecting that wire to vibrate this last half-hour."

The dinner-bell rang, and Shirley rose.

"Mr. Moore," she said, as she gathered up her silks, "have you heard
from your brother lately? Do you know what he means by staying in town
so long? Does he talk of returning?"

"He talks of returning; but what has caused his long absence I cannot
tell. To speak the truth, I thought none in Yorkshire knew better than
yourself why he was reluctant to come home."

A crimson shadow passed across Miss Keeldar's cheek.

"Write to him and urge him to come," she said. "I know there has been no
impolicy in protracting his absence thus far. It is good to let the mill
stand, while trade is so bad; but he must not abandon the county."

"I am aware," said Louis, "that he had an interview with you the evening
before he left, and I saw him quit Fieldhead afterwards. I read his
countenance, or _tried_ to read it. He turned from me. I divined that he
would be long away. Some fine, slight fingers have a wondrous knack at
pulverizing a man's brittle pride. I suppose Robert put too much trust
in his manly beauty and native gentlemanhood. Those are better off who,
being destitute of advantage, cannot cherish delusion. But I will write,
and say you advise his return."

"Do not say _I_ advise his return, but that his return is advisable."

The second bell rang, and Miss Keeldar obeyed its call.




CHAPTER XXIX.

LOUIS MOORE.


Louis Moore was used to a quiet life. Being a quiet man, he endured it
better than most men would. Having a large world of his own in his own
head and heart, he tolerated confinement to a small, still corner of the
real world very patiently.

How hushed is Fieldhead this evening! All but Moore--Miss Keeldar, the
whole family of the Sympsons, even Henry--are gone to Nunnely. Sir
Philip would have them come; he wished to make them acquainted with his
mother and sisters, who are now at the priory. Kind gentleman as the
baronet is, he asked the tutor too; but the tutor would much sooner have
made an appointment with the ghost of the Earl of Huntingdon to meet
him, and a shadowy ring of his merry men, under the canopy of the
thickest, blackest, oldest oak in Nunnely Forest. Yes, he would rather
have appointed tryst with a phantom abbess, or mist-pale nun, among the
wet and weedy relics of that ruined sanctuary of theirs, mouldering in
the core of the wood. Louis Moore longs to have something near him
to-night; but not the boy-baronet, nor his benevolent but stern mother,
nor his patrician sisters, nor one soul of the Sympsons.

This night is not calm; the equinox still struggles in its storms. The
wild rains of the day are abated; the great single cloud disparts and
rolls away from heaven, not passing and leaving a sea all sapphire, but
tossed buoyant before a continued, long-sounding, high-rushing moonlight
tempest. The moon reigns glorious, glad of the gale, as glad as if she
gave herself to his fierce caress with love. No Endymion will watch for
his goddess to-night. There are no flocks out on the mountains; and it
is well, for to-night she welcomes Æolus.

Moore, sitting in the schoolroom, heard the storm roar round the other
gable and along the hall-front. This end was sheltered. He wanted no
shelter; he desired no subdued sounds or screened position.

"All the parlours are empty," said he. "I am sick at heart of this
cell."

He left it, and went where the casements, larger and freer than the
branch-screened lattice of his own apartment, admitted unimpeded the
dark-blue, the silver-fleeced, the stirring and sweeping vision of the
autumn night-sky. He carried no candle; unneeded was lamp or fire. The
broad and clear though cloud-crossed and fluctuating beam of the moon
shone on every floor and wall.

Moore wanders through all the rooms. He seems following a phantom from
parlour to parlour. In the oak room he stops. This is not chill, and
polished, and fireless like the _salon_. The hearth is hot and ruddy;
the cinders tinkle in the intense heat of their clear glow; near the rug
is a little work-table, a desk upon it, a chair near it.

Does the vision Moore has tracked occupy that chair? You would think so,
could you see him standing before it. There is as much interest now in
his eye, and as much significance in his face, as if in this household
solitude he had found a living companion, and was going to speak to it.

He makes discoveries. A bag--a small satin bag--hangs on the chair-back.
The desk is open, the keys are in the lock. A pretty seal, a silver pen,
a crimson berry or two of ripe fruit on a green leaf, a small, clean,
delicate glove--these trifles at once decorate and disarrange the stand
they strew. Order forbids details in a picture--she puts them tidily
away; but details give charm.

Moore spoke.

"Her mark," he said. "Here she has been--careless, attractive
thing!--called away in haste, doubtless, and forgetting to return and
put all to rights. Why does she leave fascination in her footprints?
Whence did she acquire the gift to be heedless and never offend? There
is always something to chide in her, and the reprimand never settles in
displeasure on the heart, but, for her lover or her husband, when it had
trickled a while in words, would naturally melt from his lips in a kiss.
Better pass half an hour in remonstrating with her than a day in
admiring or praising any other woman alive. Am I muttering?
soliloquizing? Stop that."

He did stop it. He stood thinking, and then he made an arrangement for
his evening's comfort.

He dropped the curtains over the broad window and regal moon. He shut
out sovereign and court and starry armies; he added fuel to the hot but
fast-wasting fire; he lit a candle, of which there were a pair on the
table; he placed another chair opposite that near the workstand; and
then he sat down. His next movement was to take from his pocket a small,
thick book of blank paper, to produce a pencil, and to begin to write in
a cramp, compact hand. Come near, by all means, reader. Do not be shy.
Stoop over his shoulder fearlessly, and read as he scribbles.

"It is nine o'clock; the carriage will not return before eleven, I am
certain. Freedom is mine till then; till then I may occupy her room, sit
opposite her chair, rest my elbow on her table, have her little
mementoes about me.

"I used rather to like Solitude--to fancy her a somewhat quiet and
serious, yet fair nymph; an Oread, descending to me from lone
mountain-passes, something of the blue mist of hills in her array and of
their chill breeze in her breath, but much also of their solemn beauty
in her mien. I once could court her serenely, and imagine my heart
easier when I held her to it--all mute, but majestic.

"Since that day I called S. to me in the schoolroom, and she came and
sat so near my side; since she opened the trouble of her mind to me,
asked my protection, appealed to my strength--since that hour I abhor
Solitude. Cold abstraction, fleshless skeleton, daughter, mother, and
mate of Death!

"It is pleasant to write about what is near and dear as the core of my
heart. None can deprive me of this little book, and through this pencil
I can say to it what I will--say what I dare utter to nothing
living--say what I dare not _think_ aloud.

"We have scarcely encountered each other since that evening. Once, when
I was alone in the drawing-room, seeking a book of Henry's, she entered,
dressed for a concert at Stilbro'. Shyness--_her_ shyness, not
mine--drew a silver veil between us. Much cant have I heard and read
about 'maiden modesty,' but, properly used, and not hackneyed, the words
are good and appropriate words. As she passed to the window, after
tacitly but gracefully recognizing me, I could call her nothing in my
own mind save 'stainless virgin.' To my perception, a delicate
splendour robed her, and the modesty of girlhood was her halo. I may be
the most fatuous, as I am one of the plainest, of men, but in truth that
shyness of hers touched me exquisitely; it flattered my finest
sensations. I looked a stupid block, I dare say. I was alive with a life
of Paradise, as she turned _her_ glance from _my_ glance, and softly
averted her head to hide the suffusion of her cheek.

"I know this is the talk of a dreamer--of a rapt, romantic lunatic. I
_do_ dream. I _will_ dream now and then; and if she has inspired romance
into my prosaic composition, how can I help it?

"What a child she is sometimes! What an unsophisticated, untaught thing!
I see her now looking up into my face, and entreating me to prevent them
from smothering her, and to be sure and give her a strong narcotic. I
see her confessing that she was not so self-sufficing, so independent of
sympathy, as people thought. I see the secret tear drop quietly from her
eyelash. She said I thought her childish, and I did. She imagined I
despised her. Despised her! It was unutterably sweet to feel myself at
once near her and above her--to be conscious of a natural right and
power to sustain her, as a husband should sustain his wife.

"I worship her perfections; but it is her faults, or at least her
foibles, that bring her near to me, that nestle her to my heart, that
fold her about with my love, and that for a most selfish but
deeply-natural reason. These faults are the steps by which I mount to
ascendency over her. If she rose a trimmed, artificial mound, without
inequality, what vantage would she offer the foot? It is the natural
hill, with its mossy breaks and hollows, whose slope invites ascent,
whose summit it is pleasure to gain.

"To leave metaphor. It delights my eye to look on her. She suits me. If
I were a king and she the housemaid that swept my palace-stairs, across
all that space between us my eye would recognize her qualities; a true
pulse would beat for her in my heart, though an unspanned gulf made
acquaintance impossible. If I were a gentleman, and she waited on me as
a servant, I could not help liking that Shirley. Take from her her
education; take her ornaments, her sumptuous dress, all extrinsic
advantages; take all grace, but such as the symmetry of her form renders
inevitable; present her to me at a cottage door, in a stuff gown; let
her offer me there a draught of water, with that smile, with that warm
good-will with which she now dispenses manorial hospitality--I should
like her. I should wish to stay an hour; I should linger to talk with
that rustic. I should not feel as I _now_ do; I should find in her
nothing divine; but whenever I met the young peasant, it would be with
pleasure; whenever I left her, it would be with regret.

"How culpably careless in her to leave her desk open, where I know she
has money! In the lock hang the keys of all her repositories, of her
very jewel-casket. There is a purse in that little satin bag; I see the
tassel of silver beads hanging out. That spectacle would provoke my
brother Robert. All her little failings would, I know, be a source of
irritation to him. If they vex me it is a most pleasurable vexation. I
delight to find her at fault; and were I always resident with her, I am
aware she would be no niggard in thus ministering to my enjoyment. She
would just give me something to do, to rectify--a theme for my tutor
lectures. I never lecture Henry, never feel disposed to do so. If he
does wrong--and that is very seldom, dear, excellent lad!--a word
suffices. Often I do no more than shake my head. But the moment her
_minois mutin_ meets my eye, expostulatory words crowd to my lips. From
a taciturn man I believe she would transform me into a talker. Whence
comes the delight I take in that talk? It puzzles myself sometimes. The
more _crâne, malin, taquin_ is her mood, consequently the clearer
occasion she gives me for disapprobation, the more I seek her, the
better I like her. She is never wilder than when equipped in her habit
and hat, never less manageable than when she and Zoë come in fiery from
a race with the wind on the hills; and I confess it--to this mute page I
may confess it--I have waited an hour in the court for the chance of
witnessing her return, and for the dearer chance of receiving her in my
arms from the saddle. I have noticed (again it is to this page only I
would make the remark) that she will never permit any man but myself to
render her that assistance. I have seen her politely decline Sir Philip
Nunnely's aid. She is always mighty gentle with her young baronet,
mighty tender for his feelings, forsooth, and of his very thin-skinned
_amour propre_. I have marked her haughtily reject Sam Wynne's. Now I
know--my heart knows it, for it has felt it--that she resigns herself to
me unreluctantly. Is she conscious how my strength rejoices to serve
her? I myself am not her slave--I declare it--but my faculties gather
to her beauty, like the genii to the glisten of the lamp. All my
knowledge, all my prudence, all my calm, and all my power stand in her
presence humbly waiting a task. How glad they are when a mandate comes!
What joy they take in the toils she assigns! Does she know it?

"I have called her careless. It is remarkable that her carelessness
never compromises her refinement. Indeed, through this very loophole of
character, the reality, depth, genuineness of that refinement may be
ascertained. A whole garment sometimes covers meagreness and
malformation; through a rent sleeve a fair round arm may be revealed. I
have seen and handled many of her possessions, because they are
frequently astray. I never saw anything that did not proclaim the
lady--nothing sordid, nothing soiled. In one sense she is as scrupulous
as, in another, she is unthinking. As a peasant girl, she would go ever
trim and cleanly. Look at the pure kid of this little glove, at the
fresh, unsullied satin of the bag.

"What a difference there is between S. and that pearl C. H.! Caroline, I
fancy, is the soul of conscientious punctuality and nice exactitude. She
would precisely suit the domestic habits of a certain fastidious kinsman
of mine--so delicate, dexterous, quaint, quick, quiet--all done to a
minute, all arranged to a strawbreadth. She would suit Robert. But what
could _I_ do with anything so nearly faultless? _She_ is my equal, poor
as myself. She is certainly pretty: a little Raffaelle head
hers--Raffaelle in feature, quite English in expression, all insular
grace and purity; but where is there anything to alter, anything to
endure, anything to reprimand, to be anxious about? There she is, a lily
of the valley, untinted, needing no tint. What change could improve her?
What pencil dare to paint? _My_ sweetheart, if I ever have one, must
bear nearer affinity to the rose--a sweet, lively delight guarded with
prickly peril. _My_ wife, if I ever marry, must stir my great frame with
a sting now and then; she must furnish use to her husband's vast mass of
patience. I was not made so enduring to be mated with a lamb; I should
find more congenial responsibility in the charge of a young lioness or
leopardess. I like few things sweet but what are likewise pungent--few
things bright but what are likewise hot. I like the summer day, whose
sun makes fruit blush and corn blanch. Beauty is never so beautiful as
when, if I tease it, it wreathes back on me with spirit. Fascination is
never so imperial as when, roused and half ireful, she threatens
transformation to fierceness. I fear I should tire of the mute,
monotonous innocence of the lamb; I should ere long feel as burdensome
the nestling dove which never stirred in my bosom; but my patience would
exult in stilling the flutterings and training the energies of the
restless merlin. In managing the wild instincts of the scarce manageable
_bête fauve_ my powers would revel.

"O my pupil! O Peri! too mutinous for heaven, too innocent for hell,
never shall I do more than see, and worship, and wish for thee. Alas!
knowing I could make thee happy, will it be my doom to see thee
possessed by those who have not that power?

"However kindly the hand, if it is feeble, it cannot bend Shirley; and
she must be bent. It cannot curb her; and she must be curbed.

"Beware, Sir Philip Nunnely! I never see you walking or sitting at her
side, and observe her lips compressed, or her brow knit, in resolute
endurance of some trait of your character which she neither admires nor
likes, in determined toleration of some weakness she believes atoned for
by a virtue, but which annoys her despite that belief; I never mark the
grave glow of her face, the unsmiling sparkle of her eye, the slight
recoil of her whole frame when you draw a little too near, and gaze a
little too expressively, and whisper a little too warmly--I never
witness these things but I think of the fable of Semele reversed.

"It is not the daughter of Cadmus I see, nor do I realize her fatal
longing to look on Jove in the majesty of his god-head. It is a priest
of Juno that stands before me, watching late and lone at a shrine in an
Argive temple. For years of solitary ministry he has lived on dreams.
There is divine madness upon him. He loves the idol he serves, and prays
day and night that his frenzy may be fed, and that the Ox-eyed may smile
on her votary. She has heard; she will be propitious. All Argos
slumbers. The doors of the temple are shut; the priest waits at the
altar.

"A shock of heaven and earth is felt--not by the slumbering city, only
by that lonely watcher, brave and unshaken in his fanaticism. In the
midst of silence, with no preluding sound, he is wrapped in sudden
light. Through the roof, through the rent, wide-yawning, vast,
white-blazing blue of heaven above, pours a wondrous descent, dread as
the downrushing of stars. He has what he asked. Withdraw--forbear to
look--I am blinded. I hear in that fane an unspeakable sound. Would that
I could not hear it! I see an insufferable glory burning terribly
between the pillars. Gods be merciful and quench it!

"A pious Argive enters to make an early offering in the cool dawn of
morning. There was thunder in the night; the bolt fell here. The shrine
is shivered, the marble pavement round split and blackened. Saturnia's
statue rises chaste, grand, untouched; at her feet piled ashes lie pale.
No priest remains; he who watched will be seen no more.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There is the carriage! Let me lock up the desk and pocket the keys. She
will be seeking them to-morrow; she will have to come to me. I hear her:
'Mr. Moore, have you seen my keys?'

"So she will say, in her clear voice, speaking with reluctance, looking
ashamed, conscious that this is the twentieth time of asking. I will
tantalize her, keep her with me, expecting, doubting; and when I _do_
restore them, it shall not be without a lecture. Here is the bag, too,
and the purse; the glove--pen--seal. She shall wring them all out of me
slowly and separately--only by confession, penitence, entreaty. I never
can touch her hand, or a ringlet of her head, or a ribbon of her dress,
but I will make privileges for myself. Every feature of her face, her
bright eyes, her lips, shall go through each change they know, for my
pleasure--display each exquisite variety of glance and curve, to
delight, thrill, perhaps more hopelessly to enchain me. If I must be her
slave, I will not lose my freedom for nothing."

He locked the desk, pocketed all the property, and went.




CHAPTER XXX.

RUSHEDGE--A CONFESSIONAL.


Everybody said it was high time for Mr. Moore to return home. All
Briarfield wondered at his strange absence, and Whinbury and Nunnely
brought each its separate contribution of amazement.

Was it known why he stayed away? Yes. It was known twenty--forty times
over, there being at least forty plausible reasons adduced to account
for the unaccountable circumstance. Business it was not--_that_ the
gossips agreed. He had achieved the business on which he departed long
ago. His four ringleaders he had soon scented out and run down. He had
attended their trial, heard their conviction and sentence, and seen them
safely shipped prior to transportation.

This was known at Briarfield. The newspapers had reported it. The
_Stilbro' Courier_ had given every particular, with amplifications. None
applauded his perseverance or hailed his success, though the mill-owners
were glad of it, trusting that the terrors of law vindicated would
henceforward paralyze the sinister valour of disaffection. Disaffection,
however, was still heard muttering to himself. He swore ominous oaths
over the drugged beer of alehouses, and drank strange toasts in fiery
British gin.

One report affirmed that Moore _dared_ not come to Yorkshire; he knew
his life was not worth an hour's purchase if he did.

"I'll tell him that," said Mr. Yorke, when his foreman mentioned the
rumour; "and if _that_ does not bring him home full gallop, nothing
will."

Either that or some other motive prevailed at last to recall him. He
announced to Joe Scott the day he should arrive at Stilbro', desiring
his hackney to be sent to the George for his accommodation; and Joe
Scott having informed Mr. Yorke, that gentleman made it in his way to
meet him.
