
It was market-day. Moore arrived in time to take his usual place at the
market dinner. As something of a stranger, and as a man of note and
action, the assembled manufacturers received him with a certain
distinction. Some, who in public would scarcely have dared to
acknowledge his acquaintance, lest a little of the hate and vengeance
laid up in store for him should perchance have fallen on them, in
private hailed him as in some sort their champion. When the wine had
circulated, their respect would have kindled to enthusiasm had not
Moore's unshaken nonchalance held it in a damp, low, smouldering state.

Mr. Yorke, the permanent president of these dinners, witnessed his young
friend's bearing with exceeding complacency. If one thing could stir his
temper or excite his contempt more than another, it was to see a man
befooled by flattery or elate with popularity. If one thing smoothed,
soothed, and charmed him especially, it was the spectacle of a public
character incapable of relishing his publicity--_incapable_, I say.
Disdain would but have incensed; it was indifference that appeased his
rough spirit.

Robert, leaning back in his chair, quiet and almost surly, while the
clothiers and blanket-makers vaunted his prowess and rehearsed his
deeds--many of them interspersing their flatteries with coarse
invectives against the operative class--was a delectable sight for Mr.
Yorke. His heart tingled with the pleasing conviction that these gross
eulogiums shamed Moore deeply, and made him half scorn himself and his
work. On abuse, on reproach, on calumny, it is easy to smile; but
painful indeed is the panegyric of those we contemn. Often had Moore
gazed with a brilliant countenance over howling crowds from a hostile
hustings. He had breasted the storm of unpopularity with gallant bearing
and soul elate; but he drooped his head under the half-bred tradesmen's
praise, and shrank chagrined before their congratulations.

Yorke could not help asking him how he liked his supporters, and whether
he did not think they did honour to his cause. "But it is a pity, lad,"
he added, "that you did not hang these four samples of the unwashed. If
you had managed _that_ feat, the gentry here would have riven the horses
out of the coach, yoked to a score of asses, and drawn you into Stilbro'
like a conquering general."

Moore soon forsook the wine, broke from the party, and took the road.
In less than five minutes Mr. Yorke followed him. They rode out of
Stilbro' together.

It was early to go home, but yet it was late in the day. The last ray of
the sun had already faded from the cloud-edges, and the October night
was casting over the moorlands the shadow of her approach.

Mr. Yorke, moderately exhilarated with his moderate libations, and not
displeased to see young Moore again in Yorkshire, and to have him for
his comrade during the long ride home, took the discourse much to
himself. He touched briefly, but scoffingly, on the trials and the
conviction; he passed thence to the gossip of the neighbourhood, and ere
long he attacked Moore on his own personal concerns.

"Bob, I believe you are worsted, and you deserve it. All was smooth.
Fortune had fallen in love with you. She had decreed you the first prize
in her wheel--twenty thousand pounds; she only required that you should
hold your hand out and take it. And what did you do? You called for a
horse and rode a-hunting to Warwickshire. Your sweetheart--Fortune, I
mean--was perfectly indulgent. She said, 'I'll excuse him; he's young.'
She waited, like 'Patience on a monument,' till the chase was over and
the vermin-prey run down. She expected you would come back then, and be
a good lad. You might still have had her first prize.

"It capped her beyond expression, and me too, to find that, instead of
thundering home in a breakneck gallop and laying your assize laurels at
her feet, you coolly took coach up to London. What you have done there
Satan knows; nothing in this world, I believe, but sat and sulked. Your
face was never lily fair, but it is olive green now. You're not as bonny
as you were, man."

"And who is to have this prize you talk so much about?"

"Only a baronet; that is all. I have not a doubt in my own mind you've
lost her. She will be Lady Nunnely before Christmas."

"Hem! Quite probable."

"But she need not to have been. Fool of a lad! I swear you might have
had her."

"By what token, Mr. Yorke?"

"By every token--by the light of her eyes, the red of her cheeks. Red
they grew when your name was mentioned, though of custom they are pale."

"My chance is quite over, I suppose?"

"It ought to be. But try; it is worth trying. I call this Sir Philip
milk and water. And then he writes verses, they say--tags rhymes. _You_
are above that, Bob, at all events."

"Would you advise me to propose, late as it is, Mr. Yorke--at the
eleventh hour?"

"You can but make the experiment, Robert. If she has a fancy for
you--and, on my conscience, I believe she has or had--she will forgive
much. But, my lad, you are laughing. Is it at me? You had better grin at
your own perverseness. I see, however, you laugh at the wrong side of
your mouth. You have as sour a look at this moment as one need wish to
see."

"I have so quarrelled with myself, Yorke. I have so kicked against the
pricks, and struggled in a strait waistcoat, and dislocated my wrists
with wrenching them in handcuffs, and battered my hard head by driving
it against a harder wall."

"Ha! I'm glad to hear that. Sharp exercise yon! I hope it has done you
good--ta'en some of the self-conceit out of you?"

"Self-conceit? What is it? Self-respect, self-tolerance even, what are
they? Do you sell the articles? Do you know anybody who does? Give an
indication. They would find in me a liberal chapman. I would part with
my last guinea this minute to buy."

"Is it so with you, Robert? I find that spicy. I like a man to speak his
mind. What has gone wrong?"

"The machinery of all my nature; the whole enginery of this human mill;
the boiler, which I take to be the heart, is fit to burst."

"That suld be putten i' print; it's striking. It's almost blank verse.
Ye'll be jingling into poetry just e'now. If the afflatus comes, give
way, Robert. Never heed me; I'll bear it this whet [time]."

"Hideous, abhorrent, base blunder! You may commit in a moment what you
will rue for years--what life cannot cancel."

"Lad, go on. I call it pie, nuts, sugar-candy. I like the taste
uncommonly. Go on. It will do you good to talk. The moor is before us
now, and there is no life for many a mile round."

"I _will_ talk. I am not ashamed to tell. There is a sort of wild cat in
my breast, and I choose that you shall hear how it can yell."

"To me it is music. What grand voices you and Louis have! When Louis
sings--tones off like a soft, deep bell--I've felt myself tremble again.
The night is still. It listens. It is just leaning down to you, like a
black priest to a blacker penitent. Confess, lad. Smooth naught down. Be
candid as a convicted, justified, sanctified Methody at an experience
meeting. Make yourself as wicked as Beelzebub. It will ease your mind."

"As mean as Mammon, you would say. Yorke, if I got off horseback and
laid myself down across the road, would you have the goodness to gallop
over me, backwards and forwards, about twenty times?"

"Wi' all the pleasure in life, if there were no such thing as a
coroner's inquest."

"Hiram Yorke, I certainly believed she loved me. I have seen her eyes
sparkle radiantly when she has found me out in a crowd; she has flushed
up crimson when she has offered me her hand, and said, 'How do you do,
Mr. Moore?'

"My name had a magical influence over her. When others uttered it she
changed countenance--I know she did. She pronounced it herself in the
most musical of her many musical tones. She was cordial to me; she took
an interest in me; she was anxious about me; she wished me well; she
sought, she seized every opportunity to benefit me. I considered,
paused, watched, weighed, wondered. I could come to but one
conclusion--this is love.

"I looked at her, Yorke. I saw in her youth and a species of beauty. I
saw power in her. Her wealth offered me the redemption of my honour and
my standing. I owed her gratitude. She had aided me substantially and
effectually by a loan of five thousand pounds. Could I remember these
things? Could I believe she loved me? Could I hear wisdom urge me to
marry her, and disregard every dear advantage, disbelieve every
flattering suggestion, disdain every well-weighed counsel, turn and
leave her? Young, graceful, gracious--my benefactress, attached to me,
enamoured of me. I used to say so to myself; dwell on the word; mouth it
over and over again; swell over it with a pleasant, pompous complacency,
with an admiration dedicated entirely to myself, and unimpaired even by
esteem for her; indeed I smiled in deep secrecy at her _naïveté_ and
simplicity in being the first to love, and to show it. That whip of
yours seems to have a good heavy handle, Yorke; you can swing it about
your head and knock me out of the saddle, if you choose. I should rather
relish a loundering whack."

"Tak patience, Robert, till the moon rises and I can see you. Speak
plain out--did you love her or not? I could like to know. I feel
curious."

"Sir--sir--I say--she is very pretty, in her own style, and very
attractive. She has a look, at times, of a thing made out of fire and
air, at which I stand and marvel, without a thought of clasping and
kissing it. I felt in her a powerful magnet to my interest and vanity. I
never felt as if nature meant her to be my other and better self. When a
question on that head rushed upon me, I flung it off, saying brutally I
should be rich with her and ruined without her--vowing I would be
practical, and not romantic."

"A very sensible resolve. What mischief came of it, Bob?"

"With this sensible resolve I walked up to Fieldhead one night last
August. It was the very eve of my departure for Birmingham; for, you
see, I wanted to secure Fortune's splendid prize. I had previously
dispatched a note requesting a private interview. I found her at home,
and alone.

"She received me without embarrassment, for she thought I came on
business. _I_ was embarrassed enough, but determined. I hardly know how
I got the operation over; but I went to work in a hard, firm
fashion--frightful enough, I dare say. I sternly offered myself--my fine
person--with my debts, of course, as a settlement.

"It vexed me, it kindled my ire, to find that she neither blushed,
trembled, nor looked down. She responded, 'I doubt whether I have
understood you, Mr. Moore.'

"And I had to go over the whole proposal twice, and word it as plainly
as A B C, before she would fully take it in. And then, what did she do?
Instead of faltering a sweet Yes, or maintaining a soft, confused
silence (which would have been as good), she started up, walked twice
fast through the room, in the way that _she_ only does, and no other
woman, and ejaculated, 'God bless me!'

"Yorke, I stood on the hearth, backed by the mantelpiece; against it I
leaned, and prepared for anything--everything. I knew my doom, and I
knew myself. There was no misunderstanding her aspect and voice. She
stopped and looked at me.

"'God bless me!' she piteously repeated, in that shocked, indignant, yet
saddened accent. 'You have made a strange proposal--strange from _you_;
and if you knew how strangely you worded it and looked it, you would be
startled at yourself. You spoke like a brigand who demanded my purse
rather than like a lover who asked my heart.'

"A queer sentence, was it not, Yorke? And I knew, as she uttered it, it
was true as queer. Her words were a mirror in which I saw myself.

"I looked at her, dumb and wolfish. She at once enraged and shamed me.

"'Gérard Moore, you know you don't love Shirley Keeldar.' I might have
broken out into false swearing--vowed that I did love her; but I could
not lie in her pure face. I could not perjure myself in her truthful
presence. Besides, such hollow oaths would have been vain as void. She
would no more have believed me than she would have believed the ghost of
Judas, had he broken from the night and stood before her. Her female
heart had finer perceptions than to be cheated into mistaking my
half-coarse, half-cold admiration for true-throbbing, manly love.

"What next happened? you will say, Mr. Yorke.

"Why, she sat down in the window-seat and cried. She cried passionately.
Her eyes not only rained but lightened. They flashed, open, large, dark,
haughty, upon me. They said, 'You have pained me; you have outraged me;
you have deceived me.'

"She added words soon to looks.

"'I _did_ respect--I _did_ admire--I _did_ like you,' she said--'yes, as
much as if you were my brother; and _you--you_ want to make a
speculation of me. You would immolate me to that mill, your Moloch!'

"I had the common sense to abstain from any word of excuse, any attempt
at palliation. I stood to be scorned.

"Sold to the devil for the time being, I was certainly infatuated. When
I did speak, what do you think I said?

"'Whatever my own feelings were, I was persuaded _you_ loved _me_, Miss
Keeldar.'

"Beautiful, was it not? She sat quite confounded. 'Is it Robert Moore
that speaks?' I heard her mutter. 'Is it a man--or something lower?'

"'Do you mean,' she asked aloud--'do you mean you thought I loved you as
we love those we wish to marry?'

"It _was_ my meaning, and I said so.

"'You conceived an idea obnoxious to a woman's feelings,' was her
answer. 'You have announced it in a fashion revolting to a woman's soul.
You insinuate that all the frank kindness I have shown you has been a
complicated, a bold, and an immodest manœuvre to ensnare a husband. You
imply that at last you come here out of pity to offer me your hand,
because I have courted you. Let me say this: Your sight is jaundiced;
you have seen wrong. Your mind is warped; you have judged wrong. Your
tongue betrays you; you now speak wrong. I never loved you. Be at rest
there. My heart is as pure of passion for you as yours is barren of
affection for me.'

"I hope I was answered, Yorke?

"'I seem to be a blind, besotted sort of person,' was my remark.

"'_Loved_ you!' she cried. 'Why, I have been as frank with you as a
sister--never shunned you, never feared you. You cannot,' she affirmed
triumphantly--'you cannot make me tremble with your coming, nor
accelerate my pulse by your influence.'

"I alleged that often, when she spoke to me, she blushed, and that the
sound of my name moved her.

"'Not for _your_ sake!' she declared briefly. I urged explanation, but
could get none.

"'When I sat beside you at the school feast, did you think I loved you
then? When I stopped you in Maythorn Lane, did you think I loved you
then? When I called on you in the counting-house, when I walked with you
on the pavement, did you think I loved you then?'

"So she questioned me; and I said I did.

"By the Lord! Yorke, she rose, she grew tall, she expanded and refined
almost to flame. There was a trembling all through her, as in live coal
when its vivid vermilion is hottest.

"'That is to say that you have the worst opinion of me; that you deny me
the possession of all I value most. That is to say that I am a traitor
to all my sisters; that I have acted as no woman can act without
degrading herself and her sex; that I have sought where the incorrupt of
my kind naturally scorn and abhor to seek.' She and I were silent for
many a minute. 'Lucifer, Star of the Morning,' she went on, 'thou art
fallen! You, once high in my esteem, are hurled down; you, once intimate
in my friendship, are cast out. Go!'

"I went not. I had heard her voice tremble, seen her lip quiver. I knew
another storm of tears would fall, and then I believed some calm and
some sunshine must come, and I would wait for it.

"As fast, but more quietly than before, the warm rain streamed down.
There was another sound in her weeping--a softer, more regretful sound.
While I watched, her eyes lifted to me a gaze more reproachful than
haughty, more mournful than incensed.

"'O Moore!' said she. It was worse than 'Et tu, Brute!'

"I relieved myself by what should have been a sigh, but it became a
groan. A sense of Cain-like desolation made my breast ache.

"'There has been error in what I have done,' I said, 'and it has won me
bitter wages, which I will go and spend far from her who gave them.'

"I took my hat. All the time I could not have borne to depart so, and I
believed she would not let me. Nor would she but for the mortal pang I
had given her pride, that cowed her compassion and kept her silent.

"I was obliged to turn back of my own accord when I reached the door, to
approach her, and to say, 'Forgive me.'

"'I could, if there was not myself to forgive too,' was her reply; 'but
to mislead a sagacious man so far I must have done wrong.'

"I broke out suddenly with some declamation I do not remember. I know
that it was sincere, and that my wish and aim were to absolve her to
herself. In fact, in her case self-accusation was a chimera.

"At last she extended her hand. For the first time I wished to take her
in my arms and kiss her. I _did_ kiss her hand many times.

"'Some day we shall be friends again,' she said, 'when you have had time
to read my actions and motives in a true light, and not so horribly to
misinterpret them. Time may give you the right key to all. Then,
perhaps, you will comprehend me, and then we shall be reconciled.'

"Farewell drops rolled slow down her cheeks. She wiped them away.

"'I am sorry for what has happened--deeply sorry,' she sobbed. So was I,
God knows! Thus were we severed."

"A queer tale!" commented Mr. Yorke.

"I'll do it no more," vowed his companion; "never more will I mention
marriage to a woman unless I feel love. Henceforth credit and commerce
may take care of themselves. Bankruptcy may come when it lists. I have
done with slavish fear of disaster. I mean to work diligently, wait
patiently, bear steadily. Let the worst come, I will take my axe and an
emigrant's berth, and go out with Louis to the West; he and I have
settled it. No woman shall ever again look at me as Miss Keeldar looked,
ever again feel towards me as Miss Keeldar felt. In no woman's presence
will I ever again stand at once such a fool and such a knave, such a
brute and such a puppy."

"Tut!" said the imperturbable Yorke, "you make too much of it; but
still, I say, I am capped. Firstly, that she did not love you; and
secondly, that you did not love her. You are both young; you are both
handsome; you are both well enough for wit and even for temper--take you
on the right side. What ailed you that you could not agree?"

"We never _have_ been, never _could_ be _at home_ with each other,
Yorke. Admire each other as we might at a distance, still we jarred when
we came very near. I have sat at one side of a room and observed her at
the other, perhaps in an excited, genial moment, when she had some of
her favourites round her--her old beaux, for instance, yourself and
Helstone, with whom she is so playful, pleasant, and eloquent. I have
watched her when she was most natural, most lively, and most lovely; my
judgment has pronounced her beautiful. Beautiful she is at times, when
her mood and her array partake of the splendid. I have drawn a little
nearer, feeling that our terms of acquaintance gave me the right of
approach. I have joined the circle round her seat, caught her eye, and
mastered her attention; then we have conversed; and others, thinking me,
perhaps, peculiarly privileged, have withdrawn by degrees, and left us
alone. Were we happy thus left? For myself, I must say No. Always a
feeling of constraint came over me; always I was disposed to be stern
and strange. We talked politics and business. No soft sense of domestic
intimacy ever opened our hearts, or thawed our language and made it flow
easy and limpid. If we had confidences, they were confidences of the
counting-house, not of the heart. Nothing in her cherished affection in
me, made me better, gentler; she only stirred my brain and whetted my
acuteness. She never crept into my heart or influenced its pulse; and
for this good reason, no doubt, because I had not the secret of making
her love me."

"Well, lad, it is a queer thing. I might laugh at thee, and reckon to
despise thy refinements; but as it is dark night and we are by
ourselves, I don't mind telling thee that thy talk brings back a glimpse
of my own past life. Twenty-five years ago I tried to persuade a
beautiful woman to love me, and she would not. I had not the key to her
nature; she was a stone wall to me, doorless and windowless."

"But you loved _her_, Yorke; you worshipped Mary Cave. Your conduct,
after all, was that of a man--never of a fortune-hunter."

"Ay, I _did_ love her; but then she was beautiful as the moon we do
_not_ see to-night. There is naught like her in these days. Miss
Helstone, maybe, has a look of her, but nobody else."

"Who has a look of her?"

"That black-coated tyrant's niece--that quiet, delicate Miss Helstone.
Many a time I have put on my spectacles to look at the lassie in church,
because she has gentle blue een, wi' long lashes; and when she sits in
shadow, and is very still and very pale, and is, happen, about to fall
asleep wi' the length of the sermon and the heat of the biggin', she is
as like one of Canova's marbles as aught else."

"Was Mary Cave in that style?"

"Far grander!--less lass-like and flesh-like. You wondered why she
hadn't wings and a crown. She was a stately, peaceful angel was my
Mary."

"And you could not persuade her to love you?"

"Not with all I could do, though I prayed Heaven many a time, on my
bended knees, to help me."

"Mary Cave was not what you think her, Yorke. I have seen her picture at
the rectory. She is no angel, but a fair, regular-featured,
taciturn-looking woman--rather too white and lifeless for my taste. But,
supposing she had been something better than she was----"

"Robert," interrupted Yorke, "I could fell you off your horse at this
moment. However, I'll hold my hand. Reason tells me you are right and I
am wrong. I know well enough that the passion I still have is only the
remnant of an illusion. If Miss Cave had possessed either feeling or
sense, she could not have been so perfectly impassible to my regard as
she showed herself; she must have preferred me to that copper-faced
despot."

"Supposing, Yorke, she had been educated (no women were educated in
those days); supposing she had possessed a thoughtful, original mind, a
love of knowledge, a wish for information, which she took an artless
delight in receiving from your lips, and having measured out to her by
your hand; supposing her conversation, when she sat at your side, was
fertile, varied, imbued with a picturesque grace and genial interest,
quiet flowing but clear and bounteous; supposing that when you stood
near her by chance, or when you sat near her by design, comfort at once
became your atmosphere, and content your element; supposing that
whenever her face was under your gaze, or her idea filled your thoughts,
you gradually ceased to be hard and anxious, and pure affection, love of
home, thirst for sweet discourse, unselfish longing to protect and
cherish, replaced the sordid, cankering calculations of your trade;
supposing, with all this, that many a time, when you had been so happy
as to possess your Mary's little hand, you had felt it tremble as you
held it, just as a warm little bird trembles when you take it from its
nest; supposing you had noticed her shrink into the background on your
entrance into a room, yet if you sought her in her retreat she welcomed
you with the sweetest smile that ever lit a fair virgin face, and only
turned her eyes from the encounter of your own lest their clearness
should reveal too much; supposing, in short, your Mary had been not
cold, but modest; not vacant, but reflective; not obtuse, but sensitive;
not inane, but innocent; not prudish, but pure,--would you have left her
to court another woman for her wealth?"

Mr. Yorke raised his hat, wiped his forehead with his handkerchief.

"The moon is up," was his first not quite relevant remark, pointing with
his whip across the moor. "There she is, rising into the haze, staring
at us wi' a strange red glower. She is no more silver than old
Helstone's brow is ivory. What does she mean by leaning her cheek on
Rushedge i' that way, and looking at us wi' a scowl and a menace?"

"Yorke, if Mary had loved you silently yet faithfully, chastely yet
fervently, as you would wish your wife to love, would you have left
her?"

"Robert!"--he lifted his arm, he held it suspended, and paused--"Robert!
this is a queer world, and men are made of the queerest dregs that
Chaos churned up in her ferment. I might swear sounding oaths--oaths
that would make the poachers think there was a bittern booming in
Bilberry Moss--that, in the case you put, death only should have parted
me from Mary. But I have lived in the world fifty-five years; I have
been forced to study human nature; and, to speak a dark truth, the odds
are, if Mary had loved and not scorned me, if I had been secure of her
affection, certain of her constancy, been irritated by no doubts, stung
by no humiliations--the odds are" (he let his hand fall heavy on the
saddle)--"the odds are I should have left her!"

They rode side by side in silence. Ere either spoke again they were on
the other side of Rushedge. Briarfield lights starred the purple skirt
of the moor. Robert, being the youngest, and having less of the past to
absorb him than his comrade, recommenced first.

"I believe--I daily find it proved--that we can get nothing in this
world worth keeping, not so much as a principle or a conviction, except
out of purifying flame or through strengthening peril. We err, we fall,
we are humbled; then we walk more carefully. We greedily eat and drink
poison out of the gilded cup of vice or from the beggar's wallet of
avarice. We are sickened, degraded; everything good in us rebels against
us; our souls rise bitterly indignant against our bodies; there is a
period of civil war; if the soul has strength, it conquers and rules
thereafter."

"What art thou going to do now, Robert? What are thy plans?"

"For my private plans, I'll keep them to myself--which is very easy, as
at present I have none. No private life is permitted a man in my
position--a man in debt. For my public plans, my views are a little
altered. While I was in Birmingham I looked a little into reality,
considered closely and at their source the causes of the present
troubles of this country. I did the same in London. Unknown, I could go
where I pleased, mix with whom I would. I went where there was want of
food, of fuel, of clothing; where there was no occupation and no hope. I
saw some, with naturally elevated tendencies and good feelings, kept
down amongst sordid privations and harassing griefs. I saw many
originally low, and to whom lack of education left scarcely anything but
animal wants, disappointed in those wants, ahungered, athirst, and
desperate as famished animals. I saw what taught my brain a new lesson,
and filled my breast with fresh feelings. I have no intention to profess
more softness or sentiment than I have hitherto professed; mutiny and
ambition I regard as I have always regarded them. I should resist a
riotous mob just as heretofore; I should open on the scent of a runaway
ringleader as eagerly as ever, and run him down as relentlessly, and
follow him up to condign punishment as rigorously; but I should do it
now chiefly for the sake and the security of those he misled. Something
there is to look to, Yorke, beyond a man's personal interest, beyond the
advancement of well-laid schemes, beyond even the discharge of
dishonouring debts. To respect himself, a man must believe he renders
justice to his fellow-men. Unless I am more considerate to ignorance,
more forbearing to suffering, than I have hitherto been, I shall scorn
myself as grossly unjust.--What now?" he said, addressing his horse,
which, hearing the ripple of water, and feeling thirsty, turned to a
wayside trough, where the moonbeam was playing in a crystal eddy.

"Yorke," pursued Moore, "ride on; I must let him drink."

Yorke accordingly rode slowly forwards, occupying himself as he advanced
in discriminating, amongst the many lights now spangling the distance,
those of Briarmains. Stilbro' Moor was left behind; plantations rose
dusk on either hand; they were descending the hill; below them lay the
valley with its populous parish: they felt already at home.

Surrounded no longer by heath, it was not startling to Mr. Yorke to see
a hat rise, and to hear a voice speak behind the wall. The words,
however, were peculiar.

"When the wicked perisheth there is shouting," it said; and added, "As
the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more" (with a deeper growl):
"terrors take hold of him as waters; hell is naked before him. He shall
die without knowledge."

A fierce flash and sharp crack violated the calm of night. Yorke, ere he
turned, knew the four convicts of Birmingham were avenged.




CHAPTER XXXI.

UNCLE AND NIECE.


The die was cast. Sir Philip Nunnely knew it; Shirley knew it; Mr.
Sympson knew it. That evening, when all the Fieldhead family dined at
Nunnely Priory, decided the business.

Two or three things conduced to bring the baronet to a point. He had
observed that Miss Keeldar looked pensive and delicate. This new phase
in her demeanour smote him on his weak or poetic side. A spontaneous
sonnet brewed in his brain; and while it was still working there, one of
his sisters persuaded his lady-love to sit down to the piano and sing a
ballad--one of Sir Philip's own ballads. It was the least elaborate, the
least affected--out of all comparison the best of his numerous efforts.

It chanced that Shirley, the moment before, had been gazing from a
window down on the park. She had seen that stormy moonlight which "le
Professeur Louis" was perhaps at the same instant contemplating from her
own oak-parlour lattice; she had seen the isolated trees of the
domain--broad, strong, spreading oaks, and high-towering heroic
beeches--wrestling with the gale. Her ear had caught the full roar of
the forest lower down; the swift rushing of clouds, the moon, to the
eye, hasting swifter still, had crossed her vision. She turned from
sight and sound--touched, if not rapt; wakened, if not inspired.

She sang, as requested. There was much about love in the
ballad--faithful love that refused to abandon its object; love that
disaster could not shake; love that in calamity waxed fonder, in poverty
clung closer. The words were set to a fine old air; in themselves they
were simple and sweet. Perhaps, when read, they wanted force; when
_well_ sung, they wanted nothing. Shirley sang them well. She breathed
into the feeling softness; she poured round the passion force. Her voice
was fine that evening, its expression dramatic. She impressed all, and
charmed one.

On leaving the instrument she went to the fire, and sat down on a
seat--semi-stool, semi-cushion. The ladies were round her; none of them
spoke. The Misses Sympson and the Misses Nunnely looked upon her as
quiet poultry might look on an egret, an ibis, or any other strange
fowl. What made her sing so? _They_ never sang so. Was it _proper_ to
sing with such expression, with such originality--so unlike a
school-girl? Decidedly not. It was strange, it was unusual. What was
_strange_ must be _wrong_; what was _unusual_ must be _improper_.
Shirley was judged.

Moreover, old Lady Nunnely eyed her stonily from her great chair by the
fireside. Her gaze said, "This woman is not of mine or my daughters'
kind. I object to her as my son's wife."

Her son, catching the look, read its meaning. He grew alarmed. What he
so wished to win there was danger he might lose. He must make haste.

The room they were in had once been a picture-gallery. Sir Philip's
father--Sir Monckton--had converted it into a saloon; but still it had a
shadowy, long-withdrawing look. A deep recess with a window--a recess
that held one couch, one table, and a fairy cabinet--formed a room
within a room. Two persons standing there might interchange a dialogue,
and, so it were neither long nor loud, none be the wiser.

Sir Philip induced two of his sisters to perpetrate a duet. He gave
occupation to the Misses Sympson. The elder ladies were conversing
together. He was pleased to remark that meantime Shirley rose to look at
the pictures. He had a tale to tell about one ancestress, whose dark
beauty seemed as that of a flower of the south. He joined her, and began
to tell it.

There were mementoes of the same lady in the cabinet adorning the
recess; and while Shirley was stooping to examine the missal and the
rosary on the inlaid shelf, and while the Misses Nunnely indulged in a
prolonged screech, guiltless of expression, pure of originality,
perfectly conventional and absolutely unmeaning, Sir Philip stooped too,
and whispered a few hurried sentences. At first Miss Keeldar was struck
so still you might have fancied that whisper a charm which had changed
her to a statue; but she presently looked up and answered. They parted.
Miss Keeldar returned to the fire, and resumed her seat. The baronet
gazed after her, then went and stood behind his sisters. Mr.
Sympson--Mr. Sympson only--had marked the pantomime.

That gentleman drew his own conclusions. Had he been as acute as he was
meddling, as profound as he was prying, he might have found that in Sir
Philip's face whereby to correct his inference. Ever shallow, hasty, and
positive, he went home quite cock-a-hoop.

He was not a man that kept secrets well. When elate on a subject, he
could not avoid talking about it. The next morning, having occasion to
employ his son's tutor as his secretary, he must needs announce to him,
in mouthing accents, and with much flimsy pomp of manner, that he had
better hold himself prepared for a return to the south at an early day,
as the important business which had detained him (Mr. Sympson) so long
in Yorkshire was now on the eve of fortunate completion. His anxious and
laborious efforts were likely, at last, to be crowned with the happiest
success. A truly eligible addition was about to be made to the family
connections.

"In Sir Philip Nunnely?" Louis Moore conjectured.

Whereupon Mr. Sympson treated himself simultaneously to a pinch of snuff
and a chuckling laugh, checked only by a sudden choke of dignity, and an
order to the tutor to proceed with business.

For a day or two Mr. Sympson continued as bland as oil, but also he
seemed to sit on pins, and his gait, when he walked, emulated that of a
hen treading a hot girdle. He was for ever looking out of the window and
listening for chariot-wheels. Bluebeard's wife--Sisera's mother--were
nothing to him. He waited when the matter should be opened in form, when
himself should be consulted, when lawyers should be summoned, when
settlement discussions and all the delicious worldly fuss should
pompously begin.

At last there came a letter. He himself handed it to Miss Keeldar out of
the bag. He knew the handwriting; he knew the crest on the seal. He did
not see it opened and read, for Shirley took it to her own room; nor did
he see it answered, for she wrote her reply shut up, and was very long
about it--the best part of a day. He questioned her whether it was
answered; she responded, "Yes."

Again he waited--waited in silence, absolutely not daring to speak, kept
mute by something in Shirley's face--a very awful something--inscrutable
to him as the writing on the wall to Belshazzar. He was moved more than
once to call Daniel, in the person of Louis Moore, and to ask an
interpretation; but his dignity forbade the familiarity. Daniel himself,
perhaps, had his own private difficulties connected with that baffling
bit of translation; he looked like a student for whom grammars are blank
and dictionaries dumb.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Sympson had been out, to while away an anxious hour in the society
of his friends at De Walden Hall. He returned a little sooner than was
expected. His family and Miss Keeldar were assembled in the oak parlour.
Addressing the latter, he requested her to step with him into another
room. He wished to have with her a "_strictly_ private interview."

She rose, asking no questions and professing no surprise.

"Very well, sir," she said, in the tone of a determined person who is
informed that the dentist is come to extract that large double tooth of
his, from which he has suffered such a purgatory this month past. She
left her sewing and her thimble in the window-seat, and followed her
uncle where he led.

Shut into the drawing-room, the pair took seats, each in an arm-chair,
placed opposite, a few yards between them.

"I have been to De Walden Hall," said Mr. Sympson. He paused. Miss
Keeldar's eyes were on the pretty white-and-green carpet. _That_
information required no response. She gave none.

"I have learned," he went on slowly--"I have learned a circumstance
which surprises me."

Resting her cheek on her forefinger, she waited to be told _what_
circumstance.

"It seems that Nunnely Priory is shut up--that the family are gone back
to their place in ----shire. It seems that the baronet--that the
baronet--that Sir Philip himself has accompanied his mother and
sisters."

"Indeed!" said Shirley.

"May I ask if you share the amazement with which I received this news?"

"No, sir."

"_Is_ it news to you?"

"Yes, sir."

"I mean--I mean," pursued Mr. Sympson, now fidgeting in his chair,
quitting his hitherto brief and tolerably clear phraseology, and
returning to his customary wordy, confused, irritable style--"I mean to
have a _thorough_ explanation. I will _not_ be put off. I--I--shall
_insist_ on being heard, and on--on having my own way. My questions
_must_ be answered. I will have clear, satisfactory replies. I am not to
be trifled with. (Silence.)

"It is a strange and an extraordinary thing--a very singular--a most odd
thing! I thought all was right, knew no other; and there--the family are
gone!"

"I suppose, sir, they had a right to go."

"_Sir Philip is gone!_" (with emphasis).

Shirley raised her brows. "_Bon voyage!_" said she.

"This will not do; this must be altered, ma'am."

He drew his chair forward; he pushed it back; he looked perfectly
incensed, and perfectly helpless.

"Come, come now, uncle," expostulated Shirley, "do not begin to fret and
fume, or we shall make no sense of the business. Ask me what you want to
know. I am as willing to come to an explanation as you. I promise you
truthful replies."

"I want--I demand to know, Miss Keeldar, whether Sir Philip has made you
an offer?"

"He has."

"You avow it?"

"I avow it. But now, go on. Consider that point settled."

"He made you an offer that night we dined at the priory?"

"It is enough to say that he made it. Go on."

"He proposed in the recess--in the room that used to be a
picture-gallery--that Sir Monckton converted into it saloon?"

No answer.

"You were both examining a cabinet. I saw it all. My sagacity was not at
fault--it never is. Subsequently you received a letter from him. On what
subject--of what nature were the contents?"

"No matter."

"Ma'am, is that the way in which you speak to me?"

Shirley's foot tapped quick on the carpet.

"There you sit, silent and sullen--_you_ who promised truthful replies."

"Sir, I have answered you thus far. Proceed."

"I should like to see that letter."

"You _cannot_ see it."

"I _must_ and _shall_, ma'am; I am your guardian."

"Having ceased to be a ward, I have no guardian."

"Ungrateful being! Reared by me as my own daughter----"

"Once more, uncle, have the kindness to keep to the point. Let us both
remain cool. For my part, I do not wish to get into a passion; but, you
know, once drive me beyond certain bounds, I care little what I say--I
am not then soon checked. Listen! You have asked me whether Sir Philip
made me an offer. That question is answered. What do you wish to know
next?"

"I desire to know whether you accepted or refused him, and know it I
will."

"Certainly, you ought to know it. I refused him."

"Refused him! You--_you_, Shirley Keeldar, _refused_ Sir Philip
Nunnely?"

"I did."

The poor gentleman bounced from his chair, and first rushed and then
trotted through the room.

"There it is! There it is! There it is!"

"Sincerely speaking, I am sorry, uncle, you are so disappointed."

Concession, contrition, never do any good with some people. Instead of
softening and conciliating, they but embolden and harden them. Of that
number was Mr. Sympson.

"_I_ disappointed? What is it to me? Have _I_ an interest in it? You
would insinuate, perhaps, that I have motives?"

"Most people have motives of some sort for their actions."

"She accuses me to my face! I, that have been a parent to her, she
charges with bad motives!"

"_Bad_ motives I did not say."

"And now you prevaricate; you have no principles!"

"Uncle, you tire me. I want to go away."

"Go you shall not! I will be answered. What are your intentions, Miss
Keeldar?"

"In what respect?"

"In respect of matrimony?"

"To be quiet, and to do just as I please."

"Just as you please! The words are to the last degree indecorous."

"Mr. Sympson, I advise you not to become insulting. You know I will not
bear that."

"You read French. Your mind is poisoned with French novels. You have
imbibed French principles."

"The ground you are treading now returns a mighty hollow sound under
your feet. Beware!"

"It will end in infamy, sooner or later. I have foreseen it all along."

"Do you assert, sir, that something in which _I_ am concerned will end
in infamy?"

"That it will--that it will. You said just now you would act as you
please. You acknowledge no rules--no limitations."

"Silly stuff, and vulgar as silly!"

"Regardless of decorum, you are prepared to fly in the face of
propriety."

"You tire me, uncle."

"What, madam--_what_ could be your reasons for refusing Sir Philip?"

"At last there is another sensible question; I shall be glad to reply to
it. Sir Philip is too young for me. I regard him as a boy. All his
relations--his mother especially--would be annoyed if he married me.
Such a step would embroil him with them. I am not his equal in the
world's estimation."

"Is that all?"

"Our dispositions are not compatible."

"Why, a more amiable gentleman never breathed."

"He is very amiable--very excellent--truly estimable; but _not my
master_--not in one point. I could not trust myself with his happiness.
I would not undertake the keeping of it for thousands. I will accept no
hand which cannot hold me in check."

"I thought you liked to do as you please. You are vastly inconsistent."

"When I promise to obey, it shall be under the conviction that I can
keep that promise. I could not obey a youth like Sir Philip. Besides, he
would never command me. He would expect me always to rule--to guide--and
I have no taste whatever for the office."

"_You_ no taste for swaggering, and subduing, and ordering, and ruling?"

"Not my husband; only my uncle."

"Where is the difference?"

"There _is_ a slight difference--that is certain. And I know full well
any man who wishes to live in decent comfort with me as a husband must
be able to control me."

"I wish you had a real tyrant."

"A tyrant would not hold me for a day, not for an hour. I would
rebel--break from him--defy him."

"Are you not enough to bewilder one's brain with your
self-contradiction?"

"It is evident I bewilder your brain."

"You talk of Sir Philip being young. He is two-and-twenty."

"My husband must be thirty, with the sense of forty."

"You had better pick out some old man--some white-headed or bald-headed
swain."

"No, thank you."

"You could lead some doting fool; you might pin him to your apron."

"I might do that with a boy; but it is not my vocation. Did I not say I
prefer a _master_--one in whose presence I shall feel obliged and
disposed to be good; one whose control my impatient temper must
acknowledge; a man whose approbation can reward, whose displeasure
punish me; a man I shall feel it impossible not to love, and very
possible to fear?"

"What is there to hinder you from doing all this with Sir Philip? He is
a baronet--a man of rank, property, connections far above yours. If you
talk of intellect, he is a poet--he writes verses; which you, I take it,
cannot do, with all your cleverness."

"Neither his title, wealth, pedigree, nor poetry avail to invest him
with the power I describe. These are feather-weights; they want ballast.
A measure of sound, solid, practical sense would have stood him in
better stead with me."

"You and Henry rave about poetry! You used to catch fire like tinder on
the subject when you were a girl."

"O uncle, there is nothing really valuable in this world, there is
nothing glorious in the world to come that is not poetry!"

"Marry a poet, then, in God's name!"

"Show him me, and I will."

"Sir Philip."

"Not at all. You are almost as good a poet as he."

"Madam, you are wandering from the point."

"Indeed, uncle, I wanted to do so, and I shall be glad to lead you away
with me. Do not let us get out of temper with each other; it is not
worth while."

"Out of temper, Miss Keeldar! I should be glad to know who is out of
temper."

"_I_ am not, yet."

"If you mean to insinuate that _I_ am, I consider that you are guilty of
impertinence."

"You will be soon, if you go on at that rate."

"There it is! With your pert tongue you would try the patience of a
Job."

"I know I should."

"No levity, miss! This is not a laughing matter. It is an affair I am
resolved to probe thoroughly, convinced that there is mischief at the
