bottom. You described just now, with far too much freedom for your years
and sex, the sort of individual you would prefer as a husband. Pray, did
you paint from the life?"

Shirley opened her lips, but instead of speaking she only glowed
rose-red.

"I shall have an answer to that question," affirmed Mr. Sympson,
assuming vast courage and consequence on the strength of this symptom of
confusion.

"It was an historical picture, uncle, from several originals."

"Several originals! Bless my heart!"

"I have been in love several times."

"This is cynical."

"With heroes of many nations."

"What next----"

"And philosophers."

"She is mad----"

"Don't ring the bell, uncle; you will alarm my aunt."

"Your poor dear aunt, what a niece has she!"

"Once I loved Socrates."

"Pooh! no trifling, ma'am."

"I admired Themistocles, Leonidas, Epaminondas."

"Miss Keeldar----"

"To pass over a few centuries, Washington was a plain man, but I liked
him; but to speak of the actual present----"

"Ah! the actual present."

"To quit crude schoolgirl fancies, and come to realities."

"Realities! That is the test to which you shall be brought, ma'am."

"To avow before what altar I now kneel--to reveal the present idol of my
soul----"

"You will make haste about it, if you please. It is near luncheon time,
and confess _you shall_."

"Confess I must. My heart is full of the secret. It must be spoken. I
only wish you were Mr. Helstone instead of Mr. Sympson; you would
sympathize with me better."

"Madam, it is a question of common sense and common prudence, not of
sympathy and sentiment, and so on. Did you say it was Mr. Helstone?"

"Not precisely, but as near as may be; they are rather alike."

"I will know the name; I will have particulars."

"They positively _are_ rather alike. Their very faces are not
dissimilar--a pair of human falcons--and dry, direct, decided both. But
my hero is the mightier of the two. His mind has the clearness of the
deep sea, the patience of its rocks, the force of its billows."

"Rant and fustian!"

"I dare say he can be harsh as a saw-edge and gruff as a hungry raven."

"Miss Keeldar, does the person reside in Briarfield? Answer me that."

"Uncle, I am going to tell you; his name is trembling on my tongue."

"Speak, girl!"

"That was well said, uncle. 'Speak, girl!' It is quite tragic. England
has howled savagely against this man, uncle, and she will one day roar
exultingly over him. He has been unscared by the howl, and he will be
unelated by the shout."

"I said she was mad. She is."

"This country will change and change again in her demeanour to him; he
will never change in his duty to her. Come, cease to chafe, uncle, I'll
tell you his name."

"You shall tell me, or----"

"Listen! Arthur Wellesley, Lord Wellington."

Mr. Sympson rose up furious. He bounced out of the room, but immediately
bounced back again, shut the door, and resumed his seat.

"Ma'am, you _shall_ tell me _this_. Will your principles permit you to
marry a man without money--a man below you?"

"Never a man below me."

(In a high voice.) "Will you, Miss Keeldar, marry a poor man?"

"What right have you, Mr. Sympson, to ask me?"

"I insist upon knowing."

"You don't go the way to know."

"My family respectability shall not be compromised."

"A good resolution; keep it."

"Madam, it is _you_ who shall keep it."

"Impossible, sir, since I form no part of your family."

"Do you disown us?"

"I disdain your dictatorship."

"Whom _will_ you marry, Miss Keeldar?"

"Not Mr. Sam Wynne, because I scorn him; not Sir Philip Nunnely, because
I _only_ esteem him."

"Whom have you in your eye?"

"Four rejected candidates."

"Such obstinacy could not be unless you were under improper influence."

"What do you mean? There are certain phrases potent to make my blood
boil. Improper influence! What old woman's cackle is that?"

"Are you a young lady?"

"I am a thousand times better: I am an honest woman, and as such I will
be treated."

"Do you know" (leaning mysteriously forward, and speaking with ghastly
solemnity)--"do you know the whole neighbourhood teems with rumours
respecting you and a bankrupt tenant of yours, the foreigner Moore?"

"Does it?"

"It does. Your name is in every mouth."

"It honours the lips it crosses, and I wish to the gods it may purify
them."

"Is it _that_ person who has power to influence you?"

"Beyond any whose cause you have advocated."

"Is it he you will marry?"

"He is handsome, and manly, and commanding."

"You declare it to my face! The Flemish knave! the low trader!"

"He is talented, and venturous, and resolute. Prince is on his brow, and
ruler in his bearing."

"She glories in it! She conceals nothing! No shame, no fear!"

"When we speak the name of Moore, shame should be forgotten and fear
discarded. The Moores know only honour and courage."

"I say she is mad."

"You have taunted me till my blood is up; you have worried me till I
turn again."

"That Moore is the brother of my son's tutor. Would you let the usher
call you sister?"

Bright and broad shone Shirley's eye as she fixed it on her questioner
now.

"No, no; not for a province of possession, not for a century of life."

"You cannot separate the husband from his family."

"What then?"

"Mr. Louis Moore's sister you will be."

"Mr. Sympson, I am sick at heart with all this weak trash; I will bear
no more. Your thoughts are not my thoughts, your aims are not my aims,
your gods are not my gods. We do not view things in the same light; we
do not measure them by the same standard; we hardly speak in the same
tongue. Let us part."

"It is not," she resumed, much excited--"it is not that I hate you; you
are a good sort of man. Perhaps you mean well in your way. But we cannot
suit; we are ever at variance. You annoy me with small meddling, with
petty tyranny; you exasperate my temper, and make and keep me
passionate. As to your small maxims, your narrow rules, your little
prejudices, aversions, dogmas, bundle them off. Mr. Sympson, go, offer
them a sacrifice to the deity you worship; I'll none of them. I wash my
hands of the lot. I walk by another creed, light, faith, and hope than
you."

"Another creed! I believe she is an infidel."

"An infidel to _your_ religion, an atheist to _your_ god."

"_An--atheist!!!_"

"Your god, sir, is the world. In my eyes you too, if not an infidel, are
an idolater. I conceive that you ignorantly worship; in all things you
appear to me too superstitious. Sir, your god, your great Bel, your
fish-tailed Dagon, rises before me as a demon. You, and such as you,
have raised him to a throne, put on him a crown, given him a sceptre.
Behold how hideously he governs! See him busied at the work he likes
best--making marriages. He binds the young to the old, the strong to the
imbecile. He stretches out the arm of Mezentius, and fetters the dead to
the living. In his realm there is hatred--secret hatred; there is
disgust--unspoken disgust; there is treachery--family treachery; there
is vice--deep, deadly domestic vice. In his dominions children grow
unloving between parents who have never loved; infants are nursed on
deception from their very birth; they are reared in an atmosphere
corrupt with lies. Your god rules at the bridal of kings; look at your
royal dynasties! Your deity is the deity of foreign aristocracies;
analyze the blue blood of Spain! Your god is the Hymen of France; what
is French domestic life? All that surrounds him hastens to decay; all
declines and degenerates under his sceptre. _Your_ god is a masked
Death."

"This language is terrible! My daughters and you must associate no
longer, Miss Keeldar; there is danger in such companionship. Had I known
you a little earlier--but, extraordinary as I thought you, I could not
have believed----"

"Now, sir, do you begin to be aware that it is useless to scheme for me;
that in doing so you but sow the wind to reap the whirlwind? I sweep
your cobweb projects from my path, that I may pass on unsullied. I am
anchored on a resolve you cannot shake. My heart, my conscience shall
dispose of my hand--_they only_. Know this at last."

Mr. Sympson was becoming a little bewildered.

"Never heard such language!" he muttered again and again; "never was so
addressed in my life--never was so used!"

"You are quite confused, sir. You had better withdraw, or I will."

He rose hastily. "We must leave this place; they must pack up at once."

"Do not hurry my aunt and cousins; give them time."

"No more intercourse; she's not proper."

He made his way to the door. He came back for his handkerchief. He
dropped his snuff-box, leaving the contents scattered on the carpet; he
stumbled out. Tartar lay outside across the mat; Mr. Sympson almost fell
over him. In the climax of his exasperation he hurled an oath at the dog
and a coarse epithet at his mistress.

"Poor Mr. Sympson! he is both feeble and vulgar," said Shirley to
herself. "My head aches, and I am tired," she added; and leaning her
head upon a cushion, she softly subsided from excitement to repose. One,
entering the room a quarter of an hour afterwards, found her asleep.
When Shirley had been agitated, she generally took this natural
refreshment; it would come at her call.

The intruder paused in her unconscious presence, and said, "Miss
Keeldar."

Perhaps his voice harmonized with some dream into which she was passing.
It did not startle, it hardly roused her. Without opening her eyes, she
but turned her head a little, so that her cheek and profile, before
hidden by her arm, became visible. She looked rosy, happy, half smiling,
but her eyelashes were wet. She had wept in slumber; or perhaps, before
dropping asleep, a few natural tears had fallen after she had heard that
epithet. No man--no woman--is always strong, always able to bear up
against the unjust opinion, the vilifying word. Calumny, even from the
mouth of a fool, will sometimes cut into unguarded feelings. Shirley
looked like a child that had been naughty and punished, but was now
forgiven and at rest.

"Miss Keeldar," again said the voice. This time it woke her. She looked
up, and saw at her side Louis Moore--not close at her side, but
standing, with arrested step, two or three yards from her.

"O Mr. Moore!" she said. "I was afraid it was my uncle again: he and I
have quarrelled."

"Mr. Sympson should let you alone," was the reply. "Can he not see that
you are as yet far from strong?"

"I assure you he did not find me weak. I did not cry when he was here."

"He is about to evacuate Fieldhead--so he says. He is now giving orders
to his family. He has been in the schoolroom issuing commands in a
manner which, I suppose, was a continuation of that with which he has
harassed you."

"Are you and Henry to go?"

"I believe, as far as Henry is concerned, that was the tenor of his
scarcely intelligible directions; but he may change all to-morrow. He is
just in that mood when you cannot depend on his consistency for two
consecutive hours. I doubt whether he will leave you for weeks yet. To
myself he addressed some words which will require a little attention and
comment by-and-by, when I have time to bestow on them. At the moment he
came in I was busied with a note I had got from Mr. Yorke--so fully
busied that I cut short the interview with him somewhat abruptly. I left
him raving. Here is the note. I wish you to see it. It refers to my
brother Robert." And he looked at Shirley.

"I shall be glad to hear news of him. Is he coming home?"

"He is come. He is in Yorkshire. Mr. Yorke went yesterday to Stilbro' to
meet him."

"Mr. Moore, something is wrong----"

"Did my voice tremble? He is now at Briarmains, and I am going to see
him."

"What has occurred?"

"If you turn so pale I shall be sorry I have spoken. It might have been
worse. Robert is not dead, but much hurt."

"O sir, it is you who are pale. Sit down near me."

"Read the note. Let me open it."

Miss Keeldar read the note. It briefly signified that last night Robert
Moore had been shot at from behind the wall of Milldean plantation, at
the foot of the Brow; that he was wounded severely, but it was hoped not
fatally. Of the assassin, or assassins, nothing was known; they had
escaped. "No doubt," Mr. Yorke observed, "it was done in revenge. It was
a pity ill-will had ever been raised; but that could not be helped now."

"He is my only brother," said Louis, as Shirley returned the note. "I
cannot hear unmoved that ruffians have laid in wait for him, and shot
him down, like some wild beast from behind a wall."

"Be comforted; be hopeful. He will get better--I know he will."

Shirley, solicitous to soothe, held her hand over Mr. Moore's as it lay
on the arm of the chair. She just touched it lightly, scarce palpably.

"Well, give me your hand," he said. "It will be for the first time; it
is in a moment of calamity. Give it me."

Awaiting neither consent nor refusal, he took what he asked.

"I am going to Briarmains now," he went on. "I want you to step over to
the rectory and tell Caroline Helstone what has happened. Will you do
this? She will hear it best from you."

"Immediately," said Shirley, with docile promptitude. "Ought I to say
that there is no danger?"

"Say so."

"You will come back soon, and let me know more?"

"I will either come or write."

"Trust me for watching over Caroline. I will communicate with your
sister too; but doubtless she is already with Robert?"

"Doubtless, or will be soon. Good-morning now."

"You will bear up, come what may."

"We shall see that."

Shirley's fingers were obliged to withdraw from the tutor's. Louis was
obliged to relinquish that hand folded, clasped, hidden in his own.

"I thought I should have had to support her," he said, as he walked
towards Briarmains, "and it is she who has made me strong. That look of
pity, that gentle touch! No down was ever softer, no elixir more potent!
It lay like a snowflake; it thrilled like lightning. A thousand times I
have longed to possess that hand--to have it in mine. I _have_ possessed
it; for five minutes I held it. Her fingers and mine can never be
strangers more. Having met once they must meet again."




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE SCHOOLBOY AND THE WOOD-NYMPH.


Briarmains being nearer than the Hollow, Mr. Yorke had conveyed his
young comrade there. He had seen him laid in the best bed of the house,
as carefully as if he had been one of his own sons. The sight of his
blood, welling from the treacherously inflicted wound, made him indeed
the son of the Yorkshire gentleman's heart. The spectacle of the sudden
event, of the tall, straight shape prostrated in its pride across the
road, of the fine southern head laid low in the dust, of that youth in
prime flung at once before him pallid, lifeless, helpless--this was the
very combination of circumstances to win for the victim Mr. Yorke's
liveliest interest.

No other hand was there to raise--to aid, no other voice to question
kindly, no other brain to concert measures; he had to do it all himself.
This utter dependence of the speechless, bleeding youth (as a youth he
regarded him) on his benevolence secured that benevolence most
effectually. Well did Mr. Yorke like to have power, and to use it. He
had now between his hands power over a fellow-creature's life. It suited
him.

No less perfectly did it suit his saturnine better half. The incident
was quite in her way and to her taste. Some women would have been
terror-struck to see a gory man brought in over their threshold, and
laid down in their hall in the "howe of the night." There, you would
suppose, was subject-matter for hysterics. No. Mrs. Yorke went into
hysterics when Jessie would not leave the garden to come to her
knitting, or when Martin proposed starting for Australia, with a view to
realize freedom and escape the tyranny of Matthew; but an attempted
murder near her door--a half-murdered man in her best bed--set her
straight, cheered her spirits, gave her cap the dash of a turban.

Mrs. Yorke was just the woman who, while rendering miserable the
drudging life of a simple maid-servant, would nurse like a heroine a
hospital full of plague patients. She almost loved Moore. Her tough
heart almost yearned towards him when she found him committed to her
charge--left in her arms, as dependent on her as her youngest-born in
the cradle. Had she seen a domestic or one of her daughters give him a
draught of water or smooth his pillow, she would have boxed the
intruder's ears. She chased Jessie and Rose from the upper realm of the
house; she forbade the housemaids to set their foot in it.

Now, if the accident had happened at the rectory gates, and old Helstone
had taken in the martyr, neither Yorke nor his wife would have pitied
him. They would have adjudged him right served for his tyranny and
meddling. As it was, he became, for the present, the apple of their eye.

Strange! Louis Moore was permitted to come--to sit down on the edge of
the bed and lean over the pillow; to hold his brother's hand, and press
his pale forehead with his fraternal lips; and Mrs. Yorke bore it well.
She suffered him to stay half the day there; she once suffered him to
sit up all night in the chamber; she rose herself at five o'clock of a
wet November morning, and with her own hands lit the kitchen fire, and
made the brothers a breakfast, and served it to them herself.
Majestically arrayed in a boundless flannel wrapper, a shawl, and her
nightcap, she sat and watched them eat, as complacently as a hen beholds
her chickens feed. Yet she gave the cook warning that day for venturing
to make and carry up to Mr. Moore a basin of sago-gruel; and the
housemaid lost her favour because, when Mr. Louis was departing, she
brought him his surtout aired from the kitchen, and, like a "forward
piece" as she was, helped him on with it, and accepted in return a
smile, a "Thank you, my girl," and a shilling. Two ladies called one
day, pale and anxious, and begged earnestly, humbly, to be allowed to
see Mr. Moore one instant. Mrs. Yorke hardened her heart, and sent them
packing--not without opprobrium.

But how was it when Hortense Moore came? Not so bad as might have been
expected. The whole family of the Moores really seemed to suit Mrs.
Yorke so as no other family had ever suited her. Hortense and she
possessed an exhaustless mutual theme of conversation in the corrupt
propensities of servants. Their views of this class were similar; they
watched them with the same suspicion, and judged them with the same
severity. Hortense, too, from the very first showed no manner of
jealousy of Mrs. Yorke's attentions to Robert--she let her keep the post
of nurse with little interference; and, for herself, found ceaseless
occupation in fidgeting about the house, holding the kitchen under
surveillance, reporting what passed there, and, in short, making herself
generally useful. Visitors they both of them agreed in excluding
sedulously from the sickroom. They held the young mill-owner captive,
and hardly let the air breathe or the sun shine on him.

Mr. MacTurk, the surgeon to whom Moore's case had been committed,
pronounced his wound of a dangerous, but, he trusted, not of a hopeless
character. At first he wished to place with him a nurse of his own
selection; but this neither Mrs. Yorke nor Hortense would hear of. They
promised faithful observance of directions. He was left, therefore, for
the present in their hands.

Doubtless they executed the trust to the best of their ability; but
something got wrong. The bandages were displaced or tampered with; great
loss of blood followed. MacTurk, being summoned, came with steed afoam.
He was one of those surgeons whom it is dangerous to vex--abrupt in his
best moods, in his worst savage. On seeing Moore's state he relieved his
feelings by a little flowery language, with which it is not necessary to
strew the present page. A bouquet or two of the choicest blossoms fell
on the unperturbed head of one Mr. Graves, a stony young assistant he
usually carried about with him; with a second nosegay he gifted another
young gentleman in his train--an interesting fac-simile of himself,
being indeed his own son; but the full _corbeille_ of blushing bloom
fell to the lot of meddling womankind, _en masse_.

For the best part of one winter night himself and satellites were busied
about Moore. There at his bedside, shut up alone with him in his
chamber, they wrought and wrangled over his exhausted frame. They three
were on one side of the bed, and Death on the other. The conflict was
sharp; it lasted till day broke, when the balance between the
belligerents seemed so equal that both parties might have claimed the
victory.

At dawn Graves and young MacTurk were left in charge of the patient,
while the senior went himself in search of additional strength, and
secured it in the person of Mrs. Horsfall, the best nurse on his staff.
To this woman he gave Moore in charge, with the sternest injunctions
respecting the responsibility laid on her shoulders. She took this
responsibility stolidly, as she did also the easy-chair at the bedhead.
That moment she began her reign.

Mrs. Horsfall had one virtue--orders received from MacTurk she obeyed to
the letter. The ten commandments were less binding in her eyes than her
surgeon's dictum. In other respects she was no woman, but a dragon.
Hortense Moore fell effaced before her; Mrs. Yorke withdrew--crushed;
yet both these women were personages of some dignity in their own
estimation, and of some bulk in the estimation of others. Perfectly
cowed by the breadth, the height, the bone, and the brawn of Mrs.
Horsfall, they retreated to the back parlour. She, for her part, sat
upstairs when she liked, and downstairs when she preferred it. She took
her dram three times a day, and her pipe of tobacco four times.

As to Moore, no one now ventured to inquire about him. Mrs. Horsfall had
him at dry-nurse. It was she who was to do for him, and the general
conjecture now ran that she did for him accordingly.

Morning and evening MacTurk came to see him. His case, thus complicated
by a new mischance, was become one of interest in the surgeon's eyes. He
regarded him as a damaged piece of clockwork, which it would be
creditable to his skill to set agoing again. Graves and young
MacTurk--Moore's sole other visitors--contemplated him in the light in
which they were wont to contemplate the occupant for the time being of
the dissecting-room at Stilbro' Infirmary.

Robert Moore had a pleasant time of it--in pain, in danger, too weak to
move, almost too weak to speak, a sort of giantess his keeper, the three
surgeons his sole society. Thus he lay through the diminishing days and
lengthening nights of the whole drear month of November.

In the commencement of his captivity Moore used feebly to resist Mrs.
Horsfall. He hated the sight of her rough bulk, and dreaded the contact
of her hard hands; but she taught him docility in a trice. She made no
account whatever of his six feet, his manly thews and sinews; she turned
him in his bed as another woman would have turned a babe in its cradle.
When he was good she addressed him as "my dear" and "honey," and when he
was bad she sometimes shook him. Did he attempt to speak when MacTurk
was there, she lifted her hand and bade him "Hush!" like a nurse
checking a forward child. If she had not smoked, if she had not taken
gin, it would have been better, he thought; but she did both. Once, in
her absence, he intimated to MacTurk that "that woman was a
dram-drinker."

"Pooh! my dear sir, they are all so," was the reply he got for his
pains. "But Horsfall has this virtue," added the surgeon--"drunk or
sober, she always remembers to obey _me_."

       *       *       *       *       *

At length the latter autumn passed; its fogs, its rains withdrew from
England their mourning and their tears; its winds swept on to sigh over
lands far away. Behind November came deep winter--clearness, stillness,
frost accompanying.

A calm day had settled into a crystalline evening. The world wore a
North Pole colouring; all its lights and tints looked like the
_reflets_[A] of white, or violet, or pale green gems. The hills wore a
lilac blue; the setting sun had purple in its red; the sky was ice, all
silvered azure; when the stars rose, they were of white crystal, not
gold; gray, or cerulean, or faint emerald hues--cool, pure, and
transparent--tinged the mass of the landscape.

    [A] Find me an English word as good, reader, and I will gladly
        dispense with the French word. "Reflections" won't do.

What is this by itself in a wood no longer green, no longer even russet,
a wood neutral tint--this dark blue moving object? Why, it is a
schoolboy--a Briarfield grammar-school boy--who has left his companions,
now trudging home by the highroad, and is seeking a certain tree, with a
certain mossy mound at its root, convenient as a seat. Why is he
lingering here? The air is cold and the time wears late. He sits down.
What is he thinking about? Does he feel the chaste charm Nature wears
to-night? A pearl-white moon smiles through the gray trees; does he care
for her smile?

Impossible to say; for he is silent, and his countenance does not speak.
As yet it is no mirror to reflect sensation, but rather a mask to
conceal it. This boy is a stripling of fifteen--slight, and tall of his
years. In his face there is as little of amenity as of servility, his
eye seems prepared to note any incipient attempt to control or overreach
him, and the rest of his features indicate faculties alert for
resistance. Wise ushers avoid unnecessary interference with that lad.
To break him in by severity would be a useless attempt; to win him by
flattery would be an effort worse than useless. He is best let alone.
Time will educate and experience train him.

Professedly Martin Yorke (it is a young Yorke, of course) tramples on
the name of poetry. Talk sentiment to him, and you would be answered by
sarcasm. Here he is, wandering alone, waiting duteously on Nature, while
she unfolds a page of stern, of silent, and of solemn poetry beneath his
attentive gaze.

Being seated, he takes from his satchel a book--not the Latin grammar,
but a contraband volume of fairy tales. There will be light enough yet
for an hour to serve his keen young vision. Besides, the moon waits on
him; her beam, dim and vague as yet, fills the glade where he sits.

He reads. He is led into a solitary mountain region; all round him is
rude and desolate, shapeless, and almost colourless. He hears bells
tinkle on the wind. Forth-riding from the formless folds of the mist
dawns on him the brightest vision--a green-robed lady, on a snow-white
palfrey. He sees her dress, her gems, and her steed. She arrests him
with some mysterious question. He is spell-bound, and must follow her
into fairyland.

A second legend bears him to the sea-shore. There tumbles in a strong
tide, boiling at the base of dizzy cliffs. It rains and blows. A reef of
rocks, black and rough, stretches far into the sea. All along, and
among, and above these crags dash and flash, sweep and leap, swells,
wreaths, drifts of snowy spray. Some lone wanderer is out on these
rocks, treading with cautious step the wet, wild seaweed; glancing down
into hollows where the brine lies fathoms deep and emerald clear, and
seeing there wilder and stranger and huger vegetation than is found on
land, with treasure of shells--some green, some purple, some
pearly--clustered in the curls of the snaky plants. He hears a cry.
Looking up and forward, he sees, at the bleak point of the reef, a tall,
pale thing--shaped like man, but made of spray--transparent, tremulous,
awful. It stands not alone. They are all human figures that wanton in
the rocks--a crowd of foam-women--a band of white, evanescent Nereids.

Hush! Shut the book; hide it in the satchel. Martin hears a tread. He
listens. No--yes. Once more the dead leaves, lightly crushed, rustle on
the wood path. Martin watches; the trees part, and a woman issues
forth.

She is a lady dressed in dark silk, a veil covering her face. Martin
never met a lady in this wood before--nor any female, save, now and
then, a village girl come to gather nuts. To-night the apparition does
not displease him. He observes, as she approaches, that she is neither
old nor plain, but, on the contrary, very youthful; and, but that he now
recognizes her for one whom he has often wilfully pronounced ugly, he
would deem that he discovered traits of beauty behind the thin gauze of
that veil.

She passes him and says nothing. He knew she would. All women are proud
monkeys, and he knows no more conceited doll than that Caroline
Helstone. The thought is hardly hatched in his mind when the lady
retraces those two steps she had got beyond him, and raising her veil,
reposes her glance on his face, while she softly asks, "Are you one of
Mr. Yorke's sons?"

No human evidence would ever have been able to persuade Martin Yorke
that he blushed when thus addressed; yet blush he did, to the ears.

"I am," he said bluntly, and encouraged himself to wonder,
superciliously, what would come next.

"You are Martin, I think?" was the observation that followed.

It could not have been more felicitous. It was a simple sentence--very
artlessly, a little timidly, pronounced; but it chimed in harmony to the
youth's nature. It stilled him like a note of music.

Martin had a keen sense of his personality; he felt it right and
sensible that the girl should discriminate him from his brothers. Like
his father, he hated ceremony. It was acceptable to hear a lady address
him as "Martin," and not Mr. Martin or Master Martin, which form would
have lost her his good graces for ever. Worse, if possible, than
ceremony was the other extreme of slipshod familiarity. The slight tone
of bashfulness, the scarcely perceptible hesitation, was considered
perfectly in place.

"I am Martin," he said.

"Are your father and mother well?" (it was lucky she did not say _papa_
and _mamma_; that would have undone all); "and Rose and Jessie?"

"I suppose so."

"My cousin Hortense is still at Briarmains?"

"Oh yes."

Martin gave a comic half-smile and demi-groan. The half-smile was
responded to by the lady, who could guess in what sort of odour Hortense
was likely to be held by the young Yorkes.

"Does your mother like her?"

"They suit so well about the servants they can't help liking each
other."

"It is cold to-night."

"Why are you out so late?"

"I lost my way in this wood."

Now, indeed, Martin allowed himself a refreshing laugh of scorn.

"Lost your way in the mighty forest of Briarmains! You deserve never
more to find it."

"I never was here before, and I believe I am trespassing now. You might
inform against me if you chose, Martin, and have me fined. It is your
father's wood."

"I should think I knew that. But since you are so simple as to lose your
way, I will guide you out."

"You need not. I have got into the track now. I shall be right. Martin"
(a little quickly), "how is Mr. Moore?"

Martin had heard certain rumours; it struck him that it might be amusing
to make an experiment.

"Going to die. Nothing can save him. All hope flung overboard!"

She put her veil aside. She looked into his eyes, and said, "To die!"

"To die. All along of the women, my mother and the rest. They did
something about his bandages that finished everything. He would have got
better but for them. I am sure they should be arrested, cribbed, tried,
and brought in for Botany Bay, at the very least."

The questioner, perhaps, did nor hear this judgment. She stood
motionless. In two minutes, without another word, she moved forwards; no
good-night, no further inquiry. This was not amusing, nor what Martin
had calculated on. He expected something dramatic and demonstrative. It
was hardly worth while to frighten the girl if she would not entertain
him in return. He called, "Miss Helstone!"

She did not hear or turn. He hastened after and overtook her.

"Come; are you uneasy about what I said?"

"You know nothing about death, Martin; you are too young for me to talk
to concerning such a thing."

"Did you believe me? It's all flummery! Moore eats like three men. They
are always making sago or tapioca or something good for him. I never go
into the kitchen but there is a saucepan on the fire, cooking him some
dainty. I think I will play the old soldier, and be fed on the fat of
the land like him."

"Martin! Martin!" Here her voice trembled, and she stopped.

"It is exceedingly wrong of you, Martin. You have almost killed me."

Again she stopped. She leaned against a tree, trembling, shuddering, and
as pale as death.

Martin contemplated her with inexpressible curiosity. In one sense it
was, as he would have expressed it, "nuts" to him to see this. It told
him so much, and he was beginning to have a great relish for discovering
secrets. In another sense it reminded him of what he had once felt when
he had heard a blackbird lamenting for her nestlings, which Matthew had
crushed with a stone, and that was not a pleasant feeling. Unable to
find anything very appropriate to _say_ in order to comfort her, he
began to cast about in his mind what he could _do_. He smiled. The lad's
smile gave wondrous transparency to his physiognomy.

"Eureka!" he cried. "I'll set all straight by-and-by. You are better
now, Miss Caroline. Walk forward," he urged.

Not reflecting that it would be more difficult for Miss Helstone than
for himself to climb a wall or penetrate a hedge, he piloted her by a
short cut which led to no gate. The consequence was he had to help her
over some formidable obstacles, and while he railed at her for
helplessness, he perfectly liked to feel himself of use.

"Martin, before we separate, assure me seriously, and on your word of
honour, that Mr. Moore is better."

"How very much you think of that Moore!"

"No--but--many of his friends may ask me, and I wish to be able to give
an authentic answer."

"You may tell them he is well enough, only idle. You may tell them that
he takes mutton chops for dinner, and the best of arrowroot for supper.
I intercepted a basin myself one night on its way upstairs, and ate half
of it."

"And who waits on him, Martin? who nurses him?"

"Nurses him? The great baby! Why, a woman as round and big as our
largest water-butt--a rough, hard-favoured old girl. I make no doubt
she leads him a rich life. Nobody else is let near him. He is chiefly in
the dark. It is my belief she knocks him about terribly in that chamber.
I listen at the wall sometimes when I am in bed, and I think I hear her
thumping him. You should see her fist. She could hold half a dozen hands
like yours in her one palm. After all, notwithstanding the chops and
jellies he gets, I would not be in his shoes. In fact, it is my private
opinion that she eats most of what goes up on the tray to Mr. Moore. I
wish she may not be starving him."

Profound silence and meditation on Caroline's part, and a sly
watchfulness on Martin's.

"You never see him, I suppose, Martin?"

"I? No. I don't care to see him, for my own part."

Silence again.

"Did not you come to our house once with Mrs. Pryor, about five weeks
since, to ask after him?" again inquired Martin.

"Yes."

"I dare say you wished to be shown upstairs?"

"We _did_ wish it. We entreated it; but your mother declined."

"Ay! she declined. I heard it all. She treated you as it is her pleasure
to treat visitors now and then. She behaved to you rudely and harshly."

"She was not kind; for you know, Martin, we are relations, and it is
natural we should take an interest in Mr. Moore. But here we must part;
we are at your father's gate."

"Very well, what of that? I shall walk home with you."

"They will miss you, and wonder where you are."

"Let them. I can take care of myself, I suppose."

Martin knew that he had already incurred the penalty of a lecture, and
dry bread for his tea. No matter; the evening had furnished him with an
adventure. It was better than muffins and toast.

He walked home with Caroline. On the way he promised to see Mr. Moore,
in spite of the dragon who guarded his chamber, and appointed an hour on
the next day when Caroline was to come to Briarmains Wood and get
tidings of him. He would meet her at a certain tree. The scheme led to
nothing; still he liked it.

Having reached home, the dry bread and the lecture were duly
administered to him, and he was dismissed to bed at an early hour. He
accepted his punishment with the toughest stoicism.

Ere ascending to his chamber he paid a secret visit to the dining-room,
a still, cold, stately apartment, seldom used, for the family
customarily dined in the back parlour. He stood before the mantelpiece,
and lifted his candle to two pictures hung above--female heads: one, a
type of serene beauty, happy and innocent; the other, more lovely, but
forlorn and desperate.

"She looked like _that_," he said, gazing on the latter sketch, "when
she sobbed, turned white, and leaned against the tree."

"I suppose," he pursued, when he was in his room, and seated on the edge
of his pallet-bed--"I suppose she is what they call '_in love_'--yes,
_in love_ with that long thing in the next chamber. Whisht! is that
Horsfall clattering him? I wonder he does not yell out. It really sounds
as if she had fallen on him tooth and nail; but I suppose she is making
the bed. I saw her at it once. She hit into the mattresses as if she was
boxing. It is queer, Zillah (they call her Zillah)--Zillah Horsfall is a
woman, and Caroline Helstone is a woman; they are two individuals of the
same species--not much alike though. Is she a pretty girl, that
Caroline? I suspect she is; very nice to look at--something so clear in
her face, so soft in her eyes. I approve of her looking at me; it does
me good. She has long eyelashes. Their shadow seems to rest where she
gazes, and to instil peace and thought. If she behaves well, and
continues to suit me as she has suited me to-day, I may do her a good
turn. I rather relish the notion of circumventing my mother and that
ogress old Horsfall. Not that I like humouring Moore; but whatever I do
I'll be paid for, and in coin of my own choosing. I know what reward I
will claim--one displeasing to Moore, and agreeable to myself."

He turned into bed.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

MARTIN'S TACTICS.


It was necessary to the arrangement of Martin's plan that he should stay
at home that day. Accordingly, he found no appetite for breakfast, and
just about school-time took a severe pain about his heart, which
rendered it advisable that, instead of setting out to the grammar school
with Mark, he should succeed to his father's arm-chair by the fireside,
and also to his morning paper. This point being satisfactorily settled,
and Mark being gone to Mr. Summer's class, and Matthew and Mr. Yorke
withdrawn to the counting-house, three other exploits--nay,
four--remained to be achieved.

The first of these was to realize the breakfast he had not yet tasted,
and with which his appetite of fifteen could ill afford to dispense; the
second, third, fourth, to get his mother, Miss Moore, and Mrs. Horsfall
successfully out of the way before four o'clock that afternoon.

The first was, for the present, the most pressing, since the work before
him demanded an amount of energy which the present empty condition of
his youthful stomach did not seem likely to supply.

Martin knew the way to the larder, and knowing this way he took it. The
servants were in the kitchen, breakfasting solemnly with closed doors;
his mother and Miss Moore were airing themselves on the lawn, and
discussing the closed doors aforesaid. Martin, safe in the larder, made
fastidious selection from its stores. His breakfast had been delayed; he
was determined it should be _recherché_. It appeared to him that a
variety on his usual somewhat insipid fare of bread and milk was both
desirable and advisable; the savoury and the salutary he thought might
be combined. There was store of rosy apples laid in straw upon a shelf;
he picked out three. There was pastry upon a dish; he selected an
apricot puff and a damson tart. On the plain household bread his eye
did not dwell; but he surveyed with favour some currant tea-cakes, and
condescended to make choice of one. Thanks to his clasp-knife, he was
able to appropriate a wing of fowl and a slice of ham; a cantlet of cold
custard-pudding he thought would harmonize with these articles; and
having made this final addition to his booty, he at length sallied forth
into the hall.

He was already half-way across--three steps more would have anchored him
in the harbour of the back parlour--when the front door opened, and
there stood Matthew. Better far had it been the Old Gentleman, in full
equipage of horns, hoofs, and tail.

Matthew, sceptic and scoffer, had already failed to subscribe a prompt
belief in that pain about the heart. He had muttered some words, amongst
which the phrase "shamming Abraham" had been very distinctly audible,
and the succession to the armchair and newspaper had appeared to affect
him with mental spasms. The spectacle now before him--the apples, the
tarts, the tea-cakes, the fowl, ham, and pudding--offered evidence but
too well calculated to inflate his opinion of his own sagacity.

Martin paused _interdit_ one minute, one instant; the next he knew his
ground, and pronounced all well. With the true perspicacity _des âmes
élites_, he at once saw how this at first sight untoward event might be
turned to excellent account. He saw how it might be so handled as to
secure the accomplishment of his second task--namely, the disposal of
his mother. He knew that a collision between him and Matthew always
suggested to Mrs. Yorke the propriety of a fit of hysterics. He further
knew that, on the principle of calm succeeding to storm, after a morning
of hysterics his mother was sure to indulge in an afternoon of bed. This
would accommodate him perfectly.

The collision duly took place in the hall. A dry laugh, an insulting
sneer, a contemptuous taunt, met by a nonchalant but most cutting reply,
were the signals. They rushed at it. Martin, who usually made little
noise on these occasions, made a great deal now. In flew the servants,
Mrs. Yorke, Miss Moore. No female hand could separate them. Mr. Yorke
was summoned.

"Sons," said he, "one of you must leave my roof if this occurs again. I
will have no Cain and Abel strife here."

Martin now allowed himself to be taken off. He had been hurt; he was the
youngest and slightest. He was quite cool, in no passion; he even
smiled, content that the most difficult part of the labour he had set
himself was over.

Once he seemed to flag in the course of the morning.

"It is not worth while to bother myself for that Caroline," he remarked.
But a quarter of an hour afterwards he was again in the dining-room,
looking at the head with dishevelled tresses, and eyes turbid with
despair.

"Yes," he said, "I made her sob, shudder, almost faint. I'll see her
smile before I've done with her; besides, I want to outwit all these
womenites."

Directly after dinner Mrs. Yorke fulfilled her son's calculation by
withdrawing to her chamber. Now for Hortense.

That lady was just comfortably settled to stocking-mending in the back
parlour, when Martin--laying down a book which, stretched on the sofa
(he was still indisposed, according to his own account), he had been
perusing in all the voluptuous ease of a yet callow pacha--lazily
introduced some discourse about Sarah, the maid at the Hollow. In the
course of much verbal meandering he insinuated information that this
damsel was said to have three suitors--Frederic Murgatroyd, Jeremiah
Pighills, and John-of-Mally's-of-Hannah's-of-Deb's; and that Miss Mann
had affirmed she knew for a fact that, now the girl was left in sole
charge of the cottage, she often had her swains to meals, and
entertained them with the best the house afforded.

It needed no more. Hortense could not have lived another hour without
betaking herself to the scene of these nefarious transactions, and
inspecting the state of matters in person. Mrs. Horsfall remained.

Martin, master of the field now, extracted from his mother's work-basket
a bunch of keys; with these he opened the sideboard cupboard, produced
thence a black bottle and a small glass, placed them on the table,
nimbly mounted the stairs, made for Mr. Moore's door, tapped; the nurse
opened.

"If you please, ma'am, you are invited to step into the back parlour and
take some refreshment. You will not be disturbed; the family are out."

He watched her down; he watched her in; himself shut the door. He knew
she was safe.

The hard work was done; now for the pleasure. He snatched his cap, and
away for the wood.

