the case, and the case it is, my readers will agree with me that there
was nothing either very meritorious or very marvellous in the
integrity and moderation of my conduct at Mdlle. Reuter's pensionnat de
demoiselles.

My first business this afternoon consisted in reading the list of
places for the month, determined by the relative correctness of the
compositions given the preceding day. The list was headed, as usual,
by the name of Sylvie, that plain, quiet little girl I have described
before as being at once the best and ugliest pupil in the establishment;
the second place had fallen to the lot of a certain Leonie Ledru, a
diminutive, sharp-featured, and parchment-skinned creature of quick
wits, frail conscience, and indurated feelings; a lawyer-like thing, of
whom I used to say that, had she been a boy, she would have made a
model of an unprincipled, clever attorney. Then came Eulalie, the proud
beauty, the Juno of the school, whom six long years of drilling in the
simple grammar of the English language had compelled, despite the stiff
phlegm of her intellect, to acquire a mechanical acquaintance with most
of its rules. No smile, no trace of pleasure or satisfaction appeared in
Sylvie's nun-like and passive face as she heard her name read first.
I always felt saddened by the sight of that poor girl's absolute
quiescence on all occasions, and it was my custom to look at her, to
address her, as seldom as possible; her extreme docility, her assiduous
perseverance, would have recommended her warmly to my good opinion;
her modesty, her intelligence, would have induced me to feel most
kindly--most affectionately towards her, notwithstanding the almost
ghastly plainness of her features, the disproportion of her form, the
corpse-like lack of animation in her countenance, had I not been aware
that every friendly word, every kindly action, would be reported by her
to her confessor, and by him misinterpreted and poisoned. Once I laid my
hand on her head, in token of approbation; I thought Sylvie was going to
smile, her dim eye almost kindled; but, presently, she shrank from me;
I was a man and a heretic; she, poor child! a destined nun and devoted
Catholic: thus a four-fold wall of separation divided her mind from
mine. A pert smirk, and a hard glance of triumph, was Leonie's method of
testifying her gratification; Eulalie looked sullen and envious--she had
hoped to be first. Hortense and Caroline exchanged a reckless grimace on
hearing their names read out somewhere near the bottom of the list; the
brand of mental inferiority was considered by them as no disgrace, their
hopes for the future being based solely on their personal attractions.

This affair arranged, the regular lesson followed. During a brief
interval, employed by the pupils in ruling their books, my eye, ranging
carelessly over the benches, observed, for the first time, that the
farthest seat in the farthest row--a seat usually vacant--was
again filled by the new scholar, the Mdlle. Henri so ostentatiously
recommended to me by the directress. To-day I had on my spectacles; her
appearance, therefore, was clear to me at the first glance; I had not to
puzzle over it. She looked young; yet, had I been required to name her
exact age, I should have been somewhat nonplussed; the slightness of her
figure might have suited seventeen; a certain anxious and pre-occupied
expression of face seemed the indication of riper years. She was
dressed, like all the rest, in a dark stuff gown and a white collar; her
features were dissimilar to any there, not so rounded, more defined, yet
scarcely regular. The shape of her head too was different, the superior
part more developed, the base considerably less. I felt assured,
at first sight, that she was not a Belgian; her complexion, her
countenance, her lineaments, her figure, were all distinct from theirs,
and, evidently, the type of another race--of a race less gifted with
fullness of flesh and plenitude of blood; less jocund, material,
unthinking. When I first cast my eyes on her, she sat looking fixedly
down, her chin resting on her hand, and she did not change her attitude
till I commenced the lesson. None of the Belgian girls would have
retained one position, and that a reflective one, for the same length of
time. Yet, having intimated that her appearance was peculiar, as
being unlike that of her Flemish companions, I have little more to say
respecting it; I can pronounce no encomiums on her beauty, for she was
not beautiful; nor offer condolence on her plainness, for neither
was she plain; a careworn character of forehead, and a corresponding
moulding of the mouth, struck me with a sentiment resembling surprise,
but these traits would probably have passed unnoticed by any less
crotchety observer.

Now, reader, though I have spent more than a page in describing Mdlle.
Henri, I know well enough that I have left on your mind's eye no
distinct picture of her; I have not painted her complexion, nor her
eyes, nor her hair, nor even drawn the outline of her shape. You cannot
tell whether her nose was aquiline or retrousse, whether her chin was
long or short, her face square or oval; nor could I the first day,
and it is not my intention to communicate to you at once a knowledge I
myself gained by little and little.

I gave a short exercise: which they all wrote down. I saw the new pupil
was puzzled at first with the novelty of the form and language; once
or twice she looked at me with a sort of painful solicitude, as not
comprehending at all what I meant; then she was not ready when the
others were, she could not write her phrases so fast as they did; I
would not help her, I went on relentless. She looked at me; her eye
said most plainly, "I cannot follow you." I disregarded the appeal, and,
carelessly leaning back in my chair, glancing from time to time with a
NONCHALANT air out of the window, I dictated a little faster. On looking
towards her again, I perceived her face clouded with embarrassment, but
she was still writing on most diligently; I paused a few seconds; she
employed the interval in hurriedly re-perusing what she had written, and
shame and discomfiture were apparent in her countenance; she evidently
found she had made great nonsense of it. In ten minutes more the
dictation was complete, and, having allowed a brief space in which to
correct it, I took their books; it was with a reluctant hand Mdlle.
Henri gave up hers, but, having once yielded it to my possession, she
composed her anxious face, as if, for the present she had resolved to
dismiss regret, and had made up her mind to be thought unprecedentedly
stupid. Glancing over her exercise, I found that several lines had been
omitted, but what was written contained very few faults; I instantly
inscribed "Bon" at the bottom of the page, and returned it to her; she
smiled, at first incredulously, then as if reassured, but did not
lift her eyes; she could look at me, it seemed, when perplexed and
bewildered, but not when gratified; I thought that scarcely fair.






CHAPTER XV.

SOME time elapsed before I again gave a lesson in the first class; the
holiday of Whitsuntide occupied three days, and on the fourth it was the
turn of the second division to receive my instructions. As I made
the transit of the CARRE, I observed, as usual, the band of sewers
surrounding Mdlle. Henri; there were only about a dozen of them, but
they made as much noise as might have sufficed for fifty; they seemed
very little under her control; three or four at once assailed her with
importunate requirements; she looked harassed, she demanded silence, but
in vain. She saw me, and I read in her eye pain that a stranger should
witness the insubordination of her pupils; she seemed to entreat
order--her prayers were useless; then I remarked that she compressed
her lips and contracted her brow; and her countenance, if I read
it correctly, said--"I have done my best; I seem to merit blame
notwithstanding; blame me then who will." I passed on; as I closed the
school-room door, I heard her say, suddenly and sharply, addressing one
of the eldest and most turbulent of the lot--

"Amelie Mullenberg, ask me no question, and request of me no assistance,
for a week to come; during that space of time I will neither speak to
you nor help you."

The words were uttered with emphasis--nay, with vehemence--and a
comparative silence followed; whether the calm was permanent, I know
not; two doors now closed between me and the CARRE.

Next day was appropriated to the first class; on my arrival, I found the
directress seated, as usual, in a chair between the two estrades, and
before her was standing Mdlle. Henri, in an attitude (as it seemed to
me) of somewhat reluctant attention. The directress was knitting and
talking at the same time. Amidst the hum of a large school-room, it was
easy so to speak in the ear of one person, as to be heard by that person
alone, and it was thus Mdlle. Reuter parleyed with her teacher. The face
of the latter was a little flushed, not a little troubled; there was
vexation in it, whence resulting I know not, for the directress looked
very placid indeed; she could not be scolding in such gentle whispers,
and with so equable a mien; no, it was presently proved that her
discourse had been of the most friendly tendency, for I heard the
closing words--

"C'est assez, ma bonne amie; a present je ne veux pas vous retenir
davantage."

Without reply, Mdlle. Henri turned away; dissatisfaction was plainly
evinced in her face, and a smile, slight and brief, but bitter,
distrustful, and, I thought, scornful, curled her lip as she took her
place in the class; it was a secret, involuntary smile, which lasted but
a second; an air of depression succeeded, chased away presently by one
of attention and interest, when I gave the word for all the pupils to
take their reading-books. In general I hated the reading-lesson, it
was such a torture to the ear to listen to their uncouth mouthing of
my native tongue, and no effort of example or precept on my part ever
seemed to effect the slightest improvement in their accent. To-day,
each in her appropriate key, lisped, stuttered, mumbled, and jabbered as
usual; about fifteen had racked me in turn, and my auricular nerve was
expecting with resignation the discords of the sixteenth, when a full,
though low voice, read out, in clear correct English.

"On his way to Perth, the king was met by a Highland woman, calling
herself a prophetess; she stood at the side of the ferry by which he was
about to travel to the north, and cried with a loud voice, 'My lord the
king, if you pass this water you will never return again alive!'"--(VIDE
the HISTORY OF SCOTLAND).

I looked up in amazement; the voice was a voice of Albion; the accent
was pure and silvery; it only wanted firmness, and assurance, to be the
counterpart of what any well-educated lady in Essex or Middlesex might
have enounced, yet the speaker or reader was no other than Mdlle. Henri,
in whose grave, joyless face I saw no mark of consciousness that she had
performed any extraordinary feat. No one else evinced surprise either.
Mdlle. Reuter knitted away assiduously; I was aware, however, that at
the conclusion of the paragraph, she had lifted her eyelid and honoured
me with a glance sideways; she did not know the full excellency of the
teacher's style of reading, but she perceived that her accent was not
that of the others, and wanted to discover what I thought; I masked my
visage with indifference, and ordered the next girl to proceed.

When the lesson was over, I took advantage of the confusion caused by
breaking up, to approach Mdlle. Henri; she was standing near the window
and retired as I advanced; she thought I wanted to look out, and did
not imagine that I could have anything to say to her. I took her
exercise-book out of her hand; as I turned over the leaves I addressed
her:--

"You have had lessons in English before?" I asked.

"No, sir."

"No! you read it well; you have been in England?"

"Oh, no!" with some animation.

"You have been in English families?"

Still the answer was "No." Here my eye, resting on the flyleaf of the
book, saw written, "Frances Evan Henri."

"Your name?" I asked

"Yes, sir."

My interrogations were cut short; I heard a little rustling behind me,
and close at my back was the directress, professing to be examining the
interior of a desk.

"Mademoiselle," said she, looking up and addressing the teacher, "Will
you have the goodness to go and stand in the corridor, while the young
ladies are putting on their things, and try to keep some order?"

Mdlle. Henri obeyed.

"What splendid weather!" observed the directress cheerfully, glancing at
the same time from the window. I assented and was withdrawing. "What of
your new pupil, monsieur?" continued she, following my retreating steps.
"Is she likely to make progress in English?"

"Indeed I can hardly judge. She possesses a pretty good accent; of
her real knowledge of the language I have as yet had no opportunity of
forming an opinion."

"And her natural capacity, monsieur? I have had my fears about that: can
you relieve me by an assurance at least of its average power?"

"I see no reason to doubt its average power, mademoiselle, but really
I scarcely know her, and have not had time to study the calibre of her
capacity. I wish you a very good afternoon."

She still pursued me. "You will observe, monsieur, and tell me what you
think; I could so much better rely on your opinion than on my own; women
cannot judge of these things as men can, and, excuse my pertinacity,
monsieur, but it is natural I should feel interested about this poor
little girl (pauvre petite); she has scarcely any relations, her own
efforts are all she has to look to, her acquirements must be her sole
fortune; her present position has once been mine, or nearly so; it is
then but natural I should sympathize with her; and sometimes when I see
the difficulty she has in managing pupils, I feel quite chagrined.
I doubt not she does her best, her intentions are excellent; but,
monsieur, she wants tact and firmness. I have talked to her on the
subject, but I am not fluent, and probably did not express myself
with clearness; she never appears to comprehend me. Now, would you
occasionally, when you see an opportunity, slip in a word of advice
to her on the subject; men have so much more influence than women
have--they argue so much more logically than we do; and you, monsieur,
in particular, have so paramount a power of making yourself obeyed;
a word of advice from you could not but do her good; even if she were
sullen and headstrong (which I hope she is not), she would scarcely
refuse to listen to you; for my own part, I can truly say that I never
attend one of your lessons without deriving benefit from witnessing your
management of the pupils. The other masters are a constant source of
anxiety to me; they cannot impress the young ladies with sentiments of
respect, nor restrain the levity natural to youth: in you, monsieur, I
feel the most absolute confidence; try then to put this poor child
into the way of controlling our giddy, high-spirited Brabantoises.
But, monsieur, I would add one word more; don't alarm her AMOUR PROPRE;
beware of inflicting a wound there. I reluctantly admit that in that
particular she is blameably--some would say ridiculously--susceptible.
I fear I have touched this sore point inadvertently, and she cannot get
over it."

During the greater part of this harangue my hand was on the lock of the
outer door; I now turned it.

"Au revoir, mademoiselle," said I, and I escaped. I saw the directress's
stock of words was yet far from exhausted. She looked after me, she
would fain have detained me longer. Her manner towards me had
been altered ever since I had begun to treat her with hardness and
indifference: she almost cringed to me on every occasion; she consulted
my countenance incessantly, and beset me with innumerable little
officious attentions. Servility creates despotism. This slavish homage,
instead of softening my heart, only pampered whatever was stern and
exacting in its mood. The very circumstance of her hovering round me
like a fascinated bird, seemed to transform me into a rigid pillar of
stone; her flatteries irritated my scorn, her blandishments confirmed
my reserve. At times I wondered what she meant by giving herself such
trouble to win me, when the more profitable Pelet was already in her
nets, and when, too, she was aware that I possessed her secret, for I
had not scrupled to tell her as much: but the fact is that as it was
her nature to doubt the reality and under-value the worth of modesty,
affection, disinterestedness--to regard these qualities as foibles of
character--so it was equally her tendency to consider pride, hardness,
selfishness, as proofs of strength. She would trample on the neck
of humility, she would kneel at the feet of disdain; she would meet
tenderness with secret contempt, indifference she would woo with
ceaseless assiduities. Benevolence, devotedness, enthusiasm, were
her antipathies; for dissimulation and self-interest she had a
preference--they were real wisdom in her eyes; moral and physical
degradation, mental and bodily inferiority, she regarded with
indulgence; they were foils capable of being turned to good account as
set-offs for her own endowments. To violence, injustice, tyranny, she
succumbed--they were her natural masters; she had no propensity to hate,
no impulse to resist them; the indignation their behests awake in some
hearts was unknown in hers. From all this it resulted that the false and
selfish called her wise, the vulgar and debased termed her charitable,
the insolent and unjust dubbed her amiable, the conscientious and
benevolent generally at first accepted as valid her claim to be
considered one of themselves; but ere long the plating of pretension
wore off, the real material appeared below, and they laid her aside as a
deception.






CHAPTER XVI.

In the course of another fortnight I had seen sufficient of Frances
Evans Henri, to enable me to form a more definite opinion of her
character. I found her possessed in a somewhat remarkable degree of at
least two good points, viz., perseverance and a sense of duty; I
found she was really capable of applying to study, of contending with
difficulties. At first I offered her the same help which I had always
found it necessary to confer on the others; I began with unloosing for
her each knotty point, but I soon discovered that such help was regarded
by my new pupil as degrading; she recoiled from it with a certain proud
impatience. Hereupon I appointed her long lessons, and left her to solve
alone any perplexities they might present. She set to the task with
serious ardour, and having quickly accomplished one labour, eagerly
demanded more. So much for her perseverance; as to her sense of duty,
it evinced itself thus: she liked to learn, but hated to teach; her
progress as a pupil depended upon herself, and I saw that on herself she
could calculate with certainty; her success as a teacher rested partly,
perhaps chiefly, upon the will of others; it cost her a most painful
effort to enter into conflict with this foreign will, to endeavour
to bend it into subjection to her own; for in what regarded people in
general the action of her will was impeded by many scruples; it was as
unembarrassed as strong where her own affairs were concerned, and to it
she could at any time subject her inclination, if that inclination went
counter to her convictions of right; yet when called upon to wrestle
with the propensities, the habits, the faults of others, of children
especially, who are deaf to reason, and, for the most part, insensate to
persuasion, her will sometimes almost refused to act; then came in the
sense of duty, and forced the reluctant will into operation. A wasteful
expense of energy and labour was frequently the consequence; Frances
toiled for and with her pupils like a drudge, but it was long ere her
conscientious exertions were rewarded by anything like docility on their
part, because they saw that they had power over her, inasmuch as by
resisting her painful attempts to convince, persuade, control--by
forcing her to the employment of coercive measures--they could
inflict upon her exquisite suffering. Human beings--human children
especially--seldom deny themselves the pleasure of exercising a power
which they are conscious of possessing, even though that power consist
only in a capacity to make others wretched; a pupil whose sensations are
duller than those of his instructor, while his nerves are tougher and
his bodily strength perhaps greater, has an immense advantage over that
instructor, and he will generally use it relentlessly, because the very
young, very healthy, very thoughtless, know neither how to sympathize
nor how to spare. Frances, I fear, suffered much; a continual weight
seemed to oppress her spirits; I have said she did not live in the
house, and whether in her own abode, wherever that might be, she wore
the same preoccupied, unsmiling, sorrowfully resolved air that always
shaded her features under the roof of Mdlle. Reuter, I could not tell.

One day I gave, as a devoir, the trite little anecdote of Alfred tending
cakes in the herdsman's hut, to be related with amplifications. A
singular affair most of the pupils made of it; brevity was what they
had chiefly studied; the majority of the narratives were perfectly
unintelligible; those of Sylvie and Leonie Ledru alone pretended to
anything like sense and connection. Eulalie, indeed, had hit, upon a
clever expedient for at once ensuring accuracy and saving trouble; she
had obtained access somehow to an abridged history of England, and had
copied the anecdote out fair. I wrote on the margin of her production
"Stupid and deceitful," and then tore it down the middle.

Last in the pile of single-leaved devoirs, I found one of several
sheets, neatly written out and stitched together; I knew the hand, and
scarcely needed the evidence of the signature "Frances Evans Henri" to
confirm my conjecture as to the writer's identity.

Night was my usual time for correcting devoirs, and my own room the
usual scene of such task--task most onerous hitherto; and it seemed
strange to me to feel rising within me an incipient sense of interest,
as I snuffed the candle and addressed myself to the perusal of the poor
teacher's manuscript.

"Now," thought I, "I shall see a glimpse of what she really is; I shall
get an idea of the nature and extent of her powers; not that she can be
expected to express herself well in a foreign tongue, but still, if she
has any mind, here will be a reflection of it."

The narrative commenced by a description of a Saxon peasant's hut,
situated within the confines of a great, leafless, winter forest; it
represented an evening in December; flakes of snow were falling, and
the herdsman foretold a heavy storm; he summoned his wife to aid him in
collecting their flock, roaming far away on the pastoral banks of the
Thone; he warns her that it will be late ere they return. The good woman
is reluctant to quit her occupation of baking cakes for the evening
meal; but acknowledging the primary importance of securing the herds and
flocks, she puts on her sheep-skin mantle; and, addressing a stranger
who rests half reclined on a bed of rushes near the hearth, bids him
mind the bread till her return.

"Take care, young man," she continues, "that you fasten the door well
after us; and, above all, open to none in our absence; whatever sound
you hear, stir not, and look not out. The night will soon fall; this
forest is most wild and lonely; strange noises are often heard therein
after sunset; wolves haunt these glades, and Danish warriors infest the
country; worse things are talked of; you might chance to hear, as it
were, a child cry, and on opening the door to afford it succour, a greet
black bull, or a shadowy goblin dog, might rush over the threshold;
or, more awful still, if something flapped, as with wings, against the
lattice, and then a raven or a white dove flew in and settled on the
hearth, such a visitor would be a sure sign of misfortune to the house;
therefore, heed my advice, and lift the latchet for nothing."

Her husband calls her away, both depart. The stranger, left alone,
listens awhile to the muffled snow-wind, the remote, swollen sound of
the river, and then he speaks.

"It is Christmas Eve," says he, "I mark the date; here I sit alone on
a rude couch of rushes, sheltered by the thatch of a herdsman's hut;
I, whose inheritance was a kingdom, owe my night's harbourage to a poor
serf; my throne is usurped, my crown presses the brow of an invader; I
have no friends; my troops wander broken in the hills of Wales; reckless
robbers spoil my country; my subjects lie prostrate, their breasts
crushed by the heel of the brutal Dane. Fate! thou hast done thy worst,
and now thou standest before me resting thy hand on thy blunted blade.
Ay; I see thine eye confront mine and demand why I still live, why I
still hope. Pagan demon, I credit not thine omnipotence, and so cannot
succumb to thy power. My God, whose Son, as on this night, took on Him
the form of man, and for man vouchsafed to suffer and bleed, controls
thy hand, and without His behest thou canst not strike a stroke. My God
is sinless, eternal, all-wise--in Him is my trust; and though stripped
and crushed by thee--though naked, desolate, void of resource--I do not
despair, I cannot despair: were the lance of Guthrum now wet with my
blood, I should not despair. I watch, I toil, I hope, I pray; Jehovah,
in his own time, will aid."

I need not continue the quotation; the whole devoir was in the same
strain. There were errors of orthography, there were foreign idioms,
there were some faults of construction, there were verbs irregular
transformed into verbs regular; it was mostly made up, as the above
example shows, of short and somewhat rude sentences, and the style stood
in great need of polish and sustained dignity; yet such as it was, I
had hitherto seen nothing like it in the course of my professorial
experience. The girl's mind had conceived a picture of the hut, of the
two peasants, of the crownless king; she had imagined the wintry forest,
she had recalled the old Saxon ghost-legends, she had appreciated
Alfred's courage under calamity, she had remembered his Christian
education, and had shown him, with the rooted confidence of those
primitive days, relying on the scriptural Jehovah for aid against the
mythological Destiny. This she had done without a hint from me: I had
given the subject, but not said a word about the manner of treating it.

"I will find, or make, an opportunity of speaking to her," I said to
myself as I rolled the devoir up; "I will learn what she has of English
in her besides the name of Frances Evans; she is no novice in the
language, that is evident, yet she told me she had neither been in
England, nor taken lessons in English, nor lived in English families."

In the course of my next lesson, I made a report of the other devoirs,
dealing out praise and blame in very small retail parcels, according to
my custom, for there was no use in blaming severely, and high encomiums
were rarely merited. I said nothing of Mdlle. Henri's exercise, and,
spectacles on nose, I endeavoured to decipher in her countenance her
sentiments at the omission. I wanted to find out whether in her existed
a consciousness of her own talents. "If she thinks she did a clever
thing in composing that devoir, she will now look mortified," thought
I. Grave as usual, almost sombre, was her face; as usual, her eyes were
fastened on the cahier open before her; there was something, I thought,
of expectation in her attitude, as I concluded a brief review of the
last devoir, and when, casting it from me and rubbing my hands, I bade
them take their grammars, some slight change did pass over her air
and mien, as though she now relinquished a faint prospect of pleasant
excitement; she had been waiting for something to be discussed in which
she had a degree of interest; the discussion was not to come on, so
expectation sank back, shrunk and sad, but attention, promptly filling
up the void, repaired in a moment the transient collapse of feature;
still, I felt, rather than saw, during the whole course of the lesson,
that a hope had been wrenched from her, and that if she did not show
distress, it was because she would not.

At four o'clock, when the bell rang and the room was in immediate
tumult, instead of taking my hat and starting from the estrade, I sat
still a moment. I looked at Frances, she was putting her books into her
cabas; having fastened the button, she raised her head; encountering my
eye, she made a quiet, respectful obeisance, as bidding good afternoon,
and was turning to depart:--

"Come here," said I, lifting my finger at the same time. She hesitated;
she could not hear the words amidst the uproar now pervading both
school-rooms; I repeated the sign; she approached; again she paused
within half a yard of the estrade, and looked shy, and still doubtful
whether she had mistaken my meaning.

"Step up," I said, speaking with decision. It is the only way of dealing
with diffident, easily embarrassed characters, and with some slight
manual aid I presently got her placed just where I wanted her to be,
that is, between my desk and the window, where she was screened from the
rush of the second division, and where no one could sneak behind her to
listen.

"Take a seat," I said, placing a tabouret; and I made her sit down. I
knew what I was doing would be considered a very strange thing, and,
what was more, I did not care. Frances knew it also, and, I fear, by an
appearance of agitation and trembling, that she cared much. I drew from
my pocket the rolled-up devoir.

"This is yours, I suppose?" said I, addressing her in English, for I now
felt sure she could speak English.

"Yes," she answered distinctly; and as I unrolled it and laid it out
flat on the desk before her with my hand upon it, and a pencil in that
hand, I saw her moved, and, as it were, kindled; her depression beamed
as a cloud might behind which the sun is burning.

"This devoir has numerous faults," said I. "It will take you some years
of careful study before you are in a condition to write English with
absolute correctness. Attend: I will point out some principal defects."
And I went through it carefully, noting every error, and demonstrating
why they were errors, and how the words or phrases ought to have been
written. In the course of this sobering process she became calm. I now
went on:

"As to the substance of your devoir, Mdlle. Henri, it has surprised me;
I perused it with pleasure, because I saw in it some proofs of taste and
fancy. Taste and fancy are not the highest gifts of the human mind, but
such as they are you possess them--not probably in a paramount degree,
but in a degree beyond what the majority can boast. You may then take
courage; cultivate the faculties that God and nature have bestowed on
you, and do not fear in any crisis of suffering, under any pressure of
injustice, to derive free and full consolation from the consciousness of
their strength and rarity."

"Strength and rarity!" I repeated to myself; "ay, the words are probably
true," for on looking up, I saw the sun had dissevered its screening
cloud, her countenance was transfigured, a smile shone in her eyes--a
smile almost triumphant; it seemed to say--

"I am glad you have been forced to discover so much of my nature; you
need not so carefully moderate your language. Do you think I am myself a
stranger to myself? What you tell me in terms so qualified, I have known
fully from a child."

She did say this as plainly as a frank and flashing glance could, but
in a moment the glow of her complexion, the radiance of her aspect,
had subsided; if strongly conscious of her talents, she was equally
conscious of her harassing defects, and the remembrance of these
obliterated for a single second, now reviving with sudden force, at once
subdued the too vivid characters in which her sense of her powers had
been expressed. So quick was the revulsion of feeling, I had not time to
check her triumph by reproof; ere I could contract my brows to a frown
she had become serious and almost mournful-looking.

"Thank you, sir," said she, rising. There was gratitude both in her
voice and in the look with which she accompanied it. It was time,
indeed, for our conference to terminate; for, when I glanced around,
behold all the boarders (the day-scholars had departed) were congregated
within a yard or two of my desk, and stood staring with eyes and mouths
wide open; the three maitresses formed a whispering knot in one corner,
and, close at my elbow, was the directress, sitting on a low chair,
calmly clipping the tassels of her finished purse.






CHAPTER XVII.

AFTER all I had profited but imperfectly by the opportunity I had so
boldly achieved of speaking to Mdlle. Henri; it was my intention to ask
her how she came to be possessed of two English baptismal names, Frances
and Evans, in addition to her French surname, also whence she derived
her good accent. I had forgotten both points, or, rather, our colloquy
had been so brief that I had not had time to bring them forward;
moreover, I had not half tested her powers of speaking English; all I
had drawn from her in that language were the words "Yes," and "Thank
you, sir." "No matter," I reflected. "What has been left incomplete now,
shall be finished another day." Nor did I fail to keep the promise thus
made to myself. It was difficult to get even a few words of particular
conversation with one pupil among so many; but, according to the old
proverb, "Where there is a will, there is a way;" and again and again
I managed to find an opportunity for exchanging a few words with Mdlle.
Henri, regardless that envy stared and detraction whispered whenever I
approached her.

"Your book an instant." Such was the mode in which I often began these
brief dialogues; the time was always just at the conclusion of the
lesson; and motioning to her to rise, I installed myself in her place,
allowing her to stand deferentially at my side; for I esteemed it wise
and right in her case to enforce strictly all forms ordinarily in
use between master and pupil; the rather because I perceived that in
proportion as my manner grew austere and magisterial, hers became easy
and self-possessed--an odd contradiction, doubtless, to the ordinary
effect in such cases; but so it was.

"A pencil," said I, holding out my hand without looking at her. (I am
now about to sketch a brief report of the first of these conferences.)
She gave me one, and while I underlined some errors in a grammatical
exercise she had written, I observed--

"You are not a native of Belgium?"

"No."

"Nor of France?"

"No."

"Where, then, is your birthplace?"

"I was born at Geneva."

"You don't call Frances and Evans Swiss names, I presume?"

"No, sir; they are English names."

"Just so; and is it the custom of the Genevese to give their children
English appellatives?"

"Non, Monsieur; mais--"

"Speak English, if you please."

"Mais--"

"English--"

"But" (slowly and with embarrassment) "my parents were not all the two
Genevese."

"Say BOTH, instead of 'all the two,' mademoiselle."

"Not BOTH Swiss: my mother was English."

"Ah! and of English extraction?"

"Yes--her ancestors were all English."

"And your father?"

"He was Swiss."

"What besides? What was his profession?"

"Ecclesiastic--pastor--he had a church."

"Since your mother is an Englishwoman, why do you not speak English with
more facility?"

"Maman est morte, il y a dix ans."

"And you do homage to her memory by forgetting her language. Have the
goodness to put French out of your mind so long as I converse with
you--keep to English."

"C'est si difficile, monsieur, quand on n'en a plus l'habitude."

"You had the habitude formerly, I suppose? Now answer me in your mother
tongue."

"Yes, sir, I spoke the English more than the French when I was a child."

"Why do you not speak it now?"

"Because I have no English friends."

"You live with your father, I suppose?"

"My father is dead."

"You have brothers and sisters?"

"Not one."

"Do you live alone?"

"No--I have an aunt--ma tante Julienne."

"Your father's sister?"

"Justement, monsieur."

"Is that English?"

"No--but I forget--"

"For which, mademoiselle, if you were a child I should certainly devise
some slight punishment; at your age--you must be two or three and
twenty, I should think?"

"Pas encore, monsieur--en un mois j'aurai dix-neuf ans."

"Well, nineteen is a mature age, and, having attained it, you ought to
be so solicitous for your own improvement, that it should not be needful
for a master to remind you twice of the expediency of your speaking
English whenever practicable."

To this wise speech I received no answer; and, when I looked up, my
pupil was smiling to herself a much-meaning, though not very gay smile;
it seemed to say, "He talks of he knows not what:" it said this
so plainly, that I determined to request information on the point
concerning which my ignorance seemed to be thus tacitly affirmed.

"Are you solicitous for your own improvement?"

"Rather."

"How do you prove it, mademoiselle?"

An odd question, and bluntly put; it excited a second smile.

"Why, monsieur, I am not inattentive--am I? I learn my lessons well--"

"Oh, a child can do that! and what more do you do?"

"What more can I do?"

"Oh, certainly, not much; but you are a teacher, are you not, as well as
a pupil?"

"Yes."

"You teach lace-mending?"

"Yes."

"A dull, stupid occupation; do you like it?"

"No--it is tedious."

"Why do you pursue it? Why do you not rather teach history, geography,
grammar, even arithmetic?"

"Is monsieur certain that I am myself thoroughly acquainted with these
studies?"

"I don't know; you ought to be at your age."

"But I never was at school, monsieur--"

"Indeed! What then were your friends--what was your aunt about? She is
very much to blame."

"No monsieur, no--my aunt is good--she is not to blame--she does what
she can; she lodges and nourishes me" (I report Mdlle. Henri's phrases
literally, and it was thus she translated from the French). "She is not
rich; she has only an annuity of twelve hundred francs, and it would be
impossible for her to send me to school."

"Rather," thought I to myself on hearing this, but I continued, in the
dogmatical tone I had adopted:--

"It is sad, however, that you should be brought up in ignorance of the
most ordinary branches of education; had you known something of history
and grammar you might, by degrees, have relinquished your lace-mending
drudgery, and risen in the world."

"It is what I mean to do."

"How? By a knowledge of English alone? That will not suffice; no
respectable family will receive a governess whose whole stock of
knowledge consists in a familiarity with one foreign language."

"Monsieur, I know other things."

"Yes, yes, you can work with Berlin wools, and embroider handkerchiefs
and collars--that will do little for you."

Mdlle. Henri's lips were unclosed to answer, but she checked herself,
as thinking the discussion had been sufficiently pursued, and remained
silent.

"Speak," I continued, impatiently; "I never like the appearance of
acquiescence when the reality is not there; and you had a contradiction
at your tongue's end."

"Monsieur, I have had many lessons both in grammar, history, geography,
and arithmetic. I have gone through a course of each study."

"Bravo! but how did you manage it, since your aunt could not afford to
send you to school?"

"By lace-mending; by the thing monsieur despises so much."

"Truly! And now, mademoiselle, it will be a good exercise for you to
explain to me in English how such a result was produced by such means."

"Monsieur, I begged my aunt to have me taught lace-mending soon after
we came to Brussels, because I knew it was a METIER, a trade which was
easily learnt, and by which I could earn some money very soon. I learnt
it in a few days, and I quickly got work, for all the Brussels ladies
have old lace--very precious--which must be mended all the times it is
washed. I earned money a little, and this money I grave for lessons
in the studies I have mentioned; some of it I spent in buying books,
English books especially; soon I shall try to find a place of governess,
or school-teacher, when I can write and speak English well; but it will
be difficult, because those who know I have been a lace-mender will
despise me, as the pupils here despise me. Pourtant j'ai mon projet,"
she added in a lower tone.

"What is it?"

"I will go and live in England; I will teach French there."

The words were pronounced emphatically. She said "England" as you might
suppose an Israelite of Moses' days would have said Canaan.

"Have you a wish to see England?"

"Yes, and an intention."

And here a voice, the voice of the directress, interposed:

"Mademoiselle Henri, je crois qu'il va pleuvoir; vous feriez bien, ma
bonne amie, de retourner chez vous tout de suite."

In silence, without a word of thanks for this officious warning, Mdlle.
Henri collected her books; she moved to me respectfully, endeavoured to
move to her superior, though the endeavour was almost a failure, for her
head seemed as if it would not bend, and thus departed.

Where there is one grain of perseverance or wilfulness in the
composition, trifling obstacles are ever known rather to stimulate than
discourage. Mdlle. Reuter might as well have spared herself the trouble
of giving that intimation about the weather (by-the-by her prediction
was falsified by the event--it did not rain that evening). At the close
of the next lesson I was again at Mdlle. Henri's desk. Thus did I accost
her:--

"What is your idea of England, mademoiselle? Why do you wish to go
there?"

Accustomed by this time to the calculated abruptness of my manner, it no
longer discomposed or surprised her, and she answered with only so
much of hesitation as was rendered inevitable by the difficulty she
experienced in improvising the translation of her thoughts from French
to English.

"England is something unique, as I have heard and read; my idea of it is
vague, and I want to go there to render my idea clear, definite."

"Hum! How much of England do you suppose you could see if you went there
in the capacity of a teacher? A strange notion you must have of getting
a clear and definite idea of a country! All you could see of Great
Britain would be the interior of a school, or at most of one or two
private dwellings."

"It would be an English school; they would be English dwellings."

"Indisputably; but what then? What would be the value of observations
made on a scale so narrow?"

"Monsieur, might not one learn something by analogy?
An--echantillon--a--a sample often serves to give an idea of the whole;
besides, narrow and wide are words comparative, are they not? All my
life would perhaps seem narrow in your eyes--all the life of a--that
little animal subterranean--une taupe--comment dit-on?"

"Mole."

"Yes--a mole, which lives underground would seem narrow even to me."

"Well, mademoiselle--what then? Proceed."

"Mais, monsieur, vous me comprenez."

"Not in the least; have the goodness to explain."

"Why, monsieur, it is just so. In Switzerland I have done but little,
learnt but little, and seen but little; my life there was in a circle;
I walked the same round every day; I could not get out of it; had I
rested--remained there even till my death, I should never have enlarged
it, because I am poor and not skilful, I have not great acquirements;
when I was quite tired of this round, I begged my aunt to go to
Brussels; my existence is no larger here, because I am no richer or
higher; I walk in as narrow a limit, but the scene is changed; it would
change again if I went to England. I knew something of the bourgeois of
Geneva, now I know something of the bourgeois of Brussels; if I went to
London, I would know something of the bourgeois of London. Can you make
any sense out of what I say, monsieur, or is it all obscure?"

"I see, I see--now let us advert to another subject; you propose to
devote your life to teaching, and you are a most unsuccessful teacher;
you cannot keep your pupils in order."

A flush of painful confusion was the result of this harsh remark; she
bent her head to the desk, but soon raising it replied--

"Monsieur, I am not a skilful teacher, it is true, but practice
improves; besides, I work under difficulties; here I only teach sewing,
I can show no power in sewing, no superiority--it is a subordinate
art; then I have no associates in this house, I am isolated; I am too a
heretic, which deprives me of influence."

"And in England you would be a foreigner; that too would deprive you
of influence, and would effectually separate you from all round you; in
England you would have as few connections, as little importance as you
have here."

"But I should be learning something; for the rest, there are probably
difficulties for such as I everywhere, and if I must contend, and
perhaps be conquered, I would rather submit to English pride than to
Flemish coarseness; besides, monsieur--"

She stopped--not evidently from any difficulty in finding words to
express herself, but because discretion seemed to say, "You have said
enough."

"Finish your phrase," I urged.

"Besides, monsieur, I long to live once more among Protestants; they are
more honest than Catholics; a Romish school is a building with porous
walls, a hollow floor, a false ceiling; every room in this house,
monsieur, has eyeholes and ear-holes, and what the house is, the
inhabitants are, very treacherous; they all think it lawful to tell
lies; they all call it politeness to profess friendship where they feel
hatred."

"All?" said I; "you mean the pupils--the mere children--inexperienced,
giddy things, who have not learnt to distinguish the difference between
right and wrong?"

"On the contrary, monsieur--the children are the most sincere; they have
not yet had time to become accomplished in duplicity; they will tell
lies, but they do it inartificially, and you know they are lying; but
the grown-up people are very false; they deceive strangers, they deceive
each other--"

A servant here entered:--

"Mdlle. Henri--Mdlle. Reuter vous prie de vouloir bien conduire la
petite de Dorlodot chez elle, elle vous attend dans le cabinet
de Rosalie la portiere--c'est que sa bonne n'est pas venue la
chercher--voyez-vous."

"Eh bien! est-ce que je suis sa bonne--moi?" demanded Mdlle. Henri; then
smiling, with that same bitter, derisive smile I had seen on her lips
once before, she hastily rose and made her exit.






CHAPTER XVIII.

THE young Anglo-Swiss evidently derived both pleasure and profit from
the study of her mother-tongue. In teaching her I did not, of course,
confine myself to the ordinary school routine; I made instruction in
English a channel for instruction in literature. I prescribed to her a
course of reading; she had a little selection of English classics, a
few of which had been left her by her mother, and the others she had
purchased with her own penny-fee. I lent her some more modern works; all
these she read with avidity, giving me, in writing, a clear summary of
each work when she had perused it. Composition, too, she delighted in.
Such occupation seemed the very breath of her nostrils, and soon her
improved productions wrung from me the avowal that those qualities in
her I had termed taste and fancy ought rather to have been denominated
judgment and imagination. When I intimated so much, which I did as usual
in dry and stinted phrase, I looked for the radiant and exulting smile
my one word of eulogy had elicited before; but Frances coloured. If she
did smile, it was very softly and shyly; and instead of looking up to me
with a conquering glance, her eyes rested on my hand, which, stretched
over her shoulder, was writing some directions with a pencil on the
margin of her book.

"Well, are you pleased that I am satisfied with your progress?" I asked.

"Yes," said she slowly, gently, the blush that had half subsided
returning.

"But I do not say enough, I suppose?" I continued. "My praises are too
cool?"

She made no answer, and, I thought, looked a little sad. I divined her
thoughts, and should much have liked to have responded to them, had
it been expedient so to do. She was not now very ambitious of
my admiration--not eagerly desirous of dazzling me; a little
affection--ever so little--pleased her better than all the panegyrics in
the world. Feeling this, I stood a good while behind her, writing on
the margin of her book. I could hardly quit my station or relinquish my
occupation; something retained me bending there, my head very near
hers, and my hand near hers too; but the margin of a copy-book is not an
illimitable space--so, doubtless, the directress thought; and she took
occasion to walk past in order to ascertain by what art I prolonged so
disproportionately the period necessary for filling it. I was obliged to
go. Distasteful effort--to leave what we most prefer!

Frances did not become pale or feeble in consequence of her sedentary
employment; perhaps the stimulus it communicated to her mind
counterbalanced the inaction it imposed on her body. She changed,
indeed, changed obviously and rapidly; but it was for the better. When
I first saw her, her countenance was sunless, her complexion colourless;
she looked like one who had no source of enjoyment, no store of bliss
