"She's a beautiful woman--a very beautiful woman," said MacDonald
thoughtfully, after the door had closed behind her. "This man Barker
has certainly been down here a good deal. He is a man who might be
attractive to a woman. He admits that the dead man was jealous, and
maybe he knew best himself what cause he had for jealousy. Then there's
that wedding ring. You can't get past that. The man who tears a wedding
ring off a dead man's--What do you say to it, Mr. Holmes?"

My friend had sat with his head upon his hands, sunk in the deepest
thought. Now he rose and rang the bell. "Ames," he said, when the butler
entered, "where is Mr. Cecil Barker now?"

"I'll see, sir."

He came back in a moment to say that Barker was in the garden.

"Can you remember, Ames, what Mr. Barker had on his feet last night when
you joined him in the study?"

"Yes, Mr. Holmes. He had a pair of bedroom slippers. I brought him his
boots when he went for the police."

"Where are the slippers now?"

"They are still under the chair in the hall."

"Very good, Ames. It is, of course, important for us to know which
tracks may be Mr. Barker's and which from outside."

"Yes, sir. I may say that I noticed that the slippers were stained with
blood--so indeed were my own."

"That is natural enough, considering the condition of the room. Very
good, Ames. We will ring if we want you."

A few minutes later we were in the study. Holmes had brought with him
the carpet slippers from the hall. As Ames had observed, the soles of
both were dark with blood.

"Strange!" murmured Holmes, as he stood in the light of the window and
examined them minutely. "Very strange indeed!"

Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces, he placed the slipper
upon the blood mark on the sill. It exactly corresponded. He smiled in
silence at his colleagues.

The inspector was transfigured with excitement. His native accent
rattled like a stick upon railings.

"Man," he cried, "there's not a doubt of it! Barker has just marked the
window himself. It's a good deal broader than any bootmark. I mind that
you said it was a splay-foot, and here's the explanation. But what's the
game, Mr. Holmes--what's the game?"

"Ay, what's the game?" my friend repeated thoughtfully.

White Mason chuckled and rubbed his fat hands together in his
professional satisfaction. "I said it was a snorter!" he cried. "And a
real snorter it is!"




Chapter 6--A Dawning Light



The three detectives had many matters of detail into which to inquire;
so I returned alone to our modest quarters at the village inn. But
before doing so I took a stroll in the curious old-world garden which
flanked the house. Rows of very ancient yew trees cut into strange
designs girded it round. Inside was a beautiful stretch of lawn with an
old sundial in the middle, the whole effect so soothing and restful that
it was welcome to my somewhat jangled nerves.

In that deeply peaceful atmosphere one could forget, or remember only
as some fantastic nightmare, that darkened study with the sprawling,
bloodstained figure on the floor. And yet, as I strolled round it and
tried to steep my soul in its gentle balm, a strange incident occurred,
which brought me back to the tragedy and left a sinister impression in
my mind.

I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden. At the
end farthest from the house they thickened into a continuous hedge.
On the other side of this hedge, concealed from the eyes of anyone
approaching from the direction of the house, there was a stone seat.
As I approached the spot I was aware of voices, some remark in the deep
tones of a man, answered by a little ripple of feminine laughter.

An instant later I had come round the end of the hedge and my eyes
lit upon Mrs. Douglas and the man Barker before they were aware of my
presence. Her appearance gave me a shock. In the dining-room she had
been demure and discreet. Now all pretense of grief had passed away from
her. Her eyes shone with the joy of living, and her face still quivered
with amusement at some remark of her companion. He sat forward, his
hands clasped and his forearms on his knees, with an answering smile
upon his bold, handsome face. In an instant--but it was just one instant
too late--they resumed their solemn masks as my figure came into view.
A hurried word or two passed between them, and then Barker rose and came
towards me.

"Excuse me, sir," said he, "but am I addressing Dr. Watson?"

I bowed with a coldness which showed, I dare say, very plainly the
impression which had been produced upon my mind.

"We thought that it was probably you, as your friendship with Mr.
Sherlock Holmes is so well known. Would you mind coming over and
speaking to Mrs. Douglas for one instant?"

I followed him with a dour face. Very clearly I could see in my mind's
eye that shattered figure on the floor. Here within a few hours of the
tragedy were his wife and his nearest friend laughing together behind a
bush in the garden which had been his. I greeted the lady with reserve.
I had grieved with her grief in the dining room. Now I met her appealing
gaze with an unresponsive eye.

"I fear that you think me callous and hard-hearted," said she.

I shrugged my shoulders. "It is no business of mine," said I.

"Perhaps some day you will do me justice. If you only realized--"

"There is no need why Dr. Watson should realize," said Barker quickly.
"As he has himself said, it is no possible business of his."

"Exactly," said I, "and so I will beg leave to resume my walk."

"One moment, Dr. Watson," cried the woman in a pleading voice. "There is
one question which you can answer with more authority than anyone else
in the world, and it may make a very great difference to me. You know
Mr. Holmes and his relations with the police better than anyone
else can. Supposing that a matter were brought confidentially to his
knowledge, is it absolutely necessary that he should pass it on to the
detectives?"

"Yes, that's it," said Barker eagerly. "Is he on his own or is he
entirely in with them?"

"I really don't know that I should be justified in discussing such a
point."

"I beg--I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that you will
be helping us--helping me greatly if you will guide us on that point."

There was such a ring of sincerity in the woman's voice that for the
instant I forgot all about her levity and was moved only to do her will.

"Mr. Holmes is an independent investigator," I said. "He is his own
master, and would act as his own judgment directed. At the same time, he
would naturally feel loyalty towards the officials who were working on
the same case, and he would not conceal from them anything which would
help them in bringing a criminal to justice. Beyond this I can say
nothing, and I would refer you to Mr. Holmes himself if you wanted
fuller information."

So saying I raised my hat and went upon my way, leaving them still
seated behind that concealing hedge. I looked back as I rounded the far
end of it, and saw that they were still talking very earnestly together,
and, as they were gazing after me, it was clear that it was our
interview that was the subject of their debate.

"I wish none of their confidences," said Holmes, when I reported to him
what had occurred. He had spent the whole afternoon at the Manor House
in consultation with his two colleagues, and returned about five with
a ravenous appetite for a high tea which I had ordered for him. "No
confidences, Watson; for they are mighty awkward if it comes to an
arrest for conspiracy and murder."

"You think it will come to that?"

He was in his most cheerful and debonair humour. "My dear Watson, when
I have exterminated that fourth egg I shall be ready to put you in touch
with the whole situation. I don't say that we have fathomed it--far from
it--but when we have traced the missing dumb-bell--"

"The dumb-bell!"

"Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated the fact
that the case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell? Well, well, you need not
be downcast; for between ourselves I don't think that either Inspector
Mac or the excellent local practitioner has grasped the overwhelming
importance of this incident. One dumb-bell, Watson! Consider an athlete
with one dumb-bell! Picture to yourself the unilateral development, the
imminent danger of a spinal curvature. Shocking, Watson, shocking!"

He sat with his mouth full of toast and his eyes sparkling with
mischief, watching my intellectual entanglement. The mere sight of his
excellent appetite was an assurance of success; for I had very clear
recollections of days and nights without a thought of food, when his
baffled mind had chafed before some problem while his thin, eager
features became more attenuated with the asceticism of complete mental
concentration. Finally he lit his pipe, and sitting in the inglenook
of the old village inn he talked slowly and at random about his case,
rather as one who thinks aloud than as one who makes a considered
statement.

"A lie, Watson--a great, big, thumping, obtrusive, uncompromising
lie--that's what meets us on the threshold! There is our starting
point. The whole story told by Barker is a lie. But Barker's story is
corroborated by Mrs. Douglas. Therefore she is lying also. They are both
lying, and in a conspiracy. So now we have the clear problem. Why are
they lying, and what is the truth which they are trying so hard to
conceal? Let us try, Watson, you and I, if we can get behind the lie and
reconstruct the truth.

"How do I know that they are lying? Because it is a clumsy fabrication
which simply could not be true. Consider! According to the story given
to us, the assassin had less than a minute after the murder had been
committed to take that ring, which was under another ring, from the dead
man's finger, to replace the other ring--a thing which he would surely
never have done--and to put that singular card beside his victim. I say
that this was obviously impossible.

"You may argue--but I have too much respect for your judgment, Watson,
to think that you will do so--that the ring may have been taken before
the man was killed. The fact that the candle had been lit only a short
time shows that there had been no lengthy interview. Was Douglas, from
what we hear of his fearless character, a man who would be likely to
give up his wedding ring at such short notice, or could we conceive of
his giving it up at all? No, no, Watson, the assassin was alone with
the dead man for some time with the lamp lit. Of that I have no doubt at
all.

"But the gunshot was apparently the cause of death. Therefore the shot
must have been fired some time earlier than we are told. But there
could be no mistake about such a matter as that. We are in the presence,
therefore, of a deliberate conspiracy upon the part of the two people
who heard the gunshot--of the man Barker and of the woman Douglas.
When on the top of this I am able to show that the blood mark on the
windowsill was deliberately placed there by Barker, in order to give
a false clue to the police, you will admit that the case grows dark
against him.

"Now we have to ask ourselves at what hour the murder actually did
occur. Up to half-past ten the servants were moving about the house; so
it was certainly not before that time. At a quarter to eleven they
had all gone to their rooms with the exception of Ames, who was in
the pantry. I have been trying some experiments after you left us this
afternoon, and I find that no noise which MacDonald can make in the
study can penetrate to me in the pantry when the doors are all shut.

"It is otherwise, however, from the housekeeper's room. It is not so far
down the corridor, and from it I could vaguely hear a voice when it was
very loudly raised. The sound from a shotgun is to some extent muffled
when the discharge is at very close range, as it undoubtedly was in this
instance. It would not be very loud, and yet in the silence of the night
it should have easily penetrated to Mrs. Allen's room. She is, as she
has told us, somewhat deaf; but none the less she mentioned in her
evidence that she did hear something like a door slamming half an hour
before the alarm was given. Half an hour before the alarm was given
would be a quarter to eleven. I have no doubt that what she heard was
the report of the gun, and that this was the real instant of the murder.

"If this is so, we have now to determine what Barker and Mrs. Douglas,
presuming that they are not the actual murderers, could have been doing
from quarter to eleven, when the sound of the shot brought them down,
until quarter past eleven, when they rang the bell and summoned the
servants. What were they doing, and why did they not instantly give
the alarm? That is the question which faces us, and when it has been
answered we shall surely have gone some way to solve our problem."

"I am convinced myself," said I, "that there is an understanding between
those two people. She must be a heartless creature to sit laughing at
some jest within a few hours of her husband's murder."

"Exactly. She does not shine as a wife even in her own account of what
occurred. I am not a whole-souled admirer of womankind, as you are
aware, Watson, but my experience of life has taught me that there are
few wives, having any regard for their husbands, who would let any man's
spoken word stand between them and that husband's dead body. Should I
ever marry, Watson, I should hope to inspire my wife with some feeling
which would prevent her from being walked off by a housekeeper when my
corpse was lying within a few yards of her. It was badly stage-managed;
for even the rawest investigators must be struck by the absence of the
usual feminine ululation. If there had been nothing else, this incident
alone would have suggested a prearranged conspiracy to my mind."

"You think then, definitely, that Barker and Mrs. Douglas are guilty of
the murder?"

"There is an appalling directness about your questions, Watson," said
Holmes, shaking his pipe at me. "They come at me like bullets. If you
put it that Mrs. Douglas and Barker know the truth about the murder, and
are conspiring to conceal it, then I can give you a whole-souled answer.
I am sure they do. But your more deadly proposition is not so clear. Let
us for a moment consider the difficulties which stand in the way.

"We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a guilty
love, and that they have determined to get rid of the man who stands
between them. It is a large supposition; for discreet inquiry among
servants and others has failed to corroborate it in any way. On the
contrary, there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases were very
attached to each other."

"That, I am sure, cannot be true," said I, thinking of the beautiful
smiling face in the garden.

"Well at least they gave that impression. However, we will suppose that
they are an extraordinarily astute couple, who deceive everyone upon
this point, and conspire to murder the husband. He happens to be a man
over whose head some danger hangs--"

"We have only their word for that."

Holmes looked thoughtful. "I see, Watson. You are sketching out a theory
by which everything they say from the beginning is false. According
to your idea, there was never any hidden menace, or secret society, or
Valley of Fear, or Boss MacSomebody, or anything else. Well, that is a
good sweeping generalization. Let us see what that brings us to. They
invent this theory to account for the crime. They then play up to the
idea by leaving this bicycle in the park as proof of the existence of
some outsider. The stain on the windowsill conveys the same idea. So
does the card on the body, which might have been prepared in the house.
That all fits into your hypothesis, Watson. But now we come on the
nasty, angular, uncompromising bits which won't slip into their places.
Why a cut-off shotgun of all weapons--and an American one at that? How
could they be so sure that the sound of it would not bring someone on to
them? It's a mere chance as it is that Mrs. Allen did not start out to
inquire for the slamming door. Why did your guilty couple do all this,
Watson?"

"I confess that I can't explain it."

"Then again, if a woman and her lover conspire to murder a husband,
are they going to advertise their guilt by ostentatiously removing his
wedding ring after his death? Does that strike you as very probable,
Watson?"

"No, it does not."

"And once again, if the thought of leaving a bicycle concealed outside
had occurred to you, would it really have seemed worth doing when the
dullest detective would naturally say this is an obvious blind, as the
bicycle is the first thing which the fugitive needed in order to make
his escape."

"I can conceive of no explanation."

"And yet there should be no combination of events for which the wit of
man cannot conceive an explanation. Simply as a mental exercise, without
any assertion that it is true, let me indicate a possible line of
thought. It is, I admit, mere imagination; but how often is imagination
the mother of truth?

"We will suppose that there was a guilty secret, a really shameful
secret in the life of this man Douglas. This leads to his murder by
someone who is, we will suppose, an avenger, someone from outside.
This avenger, for some reason which I confess I am still at a loss
to explain, took the dead man's wedding ring. The vendetta might
conceivably date back to the man's first marriage, and the ring be taken
for some such reason.

"Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had reached the room.
The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest him would lead
to the publication of some hideous scandal. They were converted to
this idea, and preferred to let him go. For this purpose they probably
lowered the bridge, which can be done quite noiselessly, and then raised
it again. He made his escape, and for some reason thought that he could
do so more safely on foot than on the bicycle. He therefore left his
machine where it would not be discovered until he had got safely away.
So far we are within the bounds of possibility, are we not?"

"Well, it is possible, no doubt," said I, with some reserve.

"We have to remember, Watson, that whatever occurred is certainly
something very extraordinary. Well, now, to continue our supposititious
case, the couple--not necessarily a guilty couple--realize after the
murderer is gone that they have placed themselves in a position in
which it may be difficult for them to prove that they did not themselves
either do the deed or connive at it. They rapidly and rather clumsily
met the situation. The mark was put by Barker's bloodstained slipper
upon the windowsill to suggest how the fugitive got away. They obviously
were the two who must have heard the sound of the gun; so they gave the
alarm exactly as they would have done, but a good half hour after the
event."

"And how do you propose to prove all this?"

"Well, if there were an outsider, he may be traced and taken. That would
be the most effective of all proofs. But if not--well, the resources of
science are far from being exhausted. I think that an evening alone in
that study would help me much."

"An evening alone!"

"I propose to go up there presently. I have arranged it with the
estimable Ames, who is by no means wholehearted about Barker. I shall
sit in that room and see if its atmosphere brings me inspiration. I'm
a believer in the genius loci. You smile, Friend Watson. Well, we shall
see. By the way, you have that big umbrella of yours, have you not?"

"It is here."

"Well, I'll borrow that if I may."

"Certainly--but what a wretched weapon! If there is danger--"

"Nothing serious, my dear Watson, or I should certainly ask for your
assistance. But I'll take the umbrella. At present I am only awaiting
the return of our colleagues from Tunbridge Wells, where they are at
present engaged in trying for a likely owner to the bicycle."

It was nightfall before Inspector MacDonald and White Mason came back
from their expedition, and they arrived exultant, reporting a great
advance in our investigation.

"Man, I'll admeet that I had my doubts if there was ever an outsider,"
said MacDonald, "but that's all past now. We've had the bicycle
identified, and we have a description of our man; so that's a long step
on our journey."

"It sounds to me like the beginning of the end," said Holmes. "I'm sure
I congratulate you both with all my heart."

"Well, I started from the fact that Mr. Douglas had seemed disturbed
since the day before, when he had been at Tunbridge Wells. It was at
Tunbridge Wells then that he had become conscious of some danger. It was
clear, therefore, that if a man had come over with a bicycle it was
from Tunbridge Wells that he might be expected to have come. We took the
bicycle over with us and showed it at the hotels. It was identified at
once by the manager of the Eagle Commercial as belonging to a man named
Hargrave, who had taken a room there two days before. This bicycle and
a small valise were his whole belongings. He had registered his name
as coming from London, but had given no address. The valise was London
made, and the contents were British; but the man himself was undoubtedly
an American."

"Well, well," said Holmes gleefully, "you have indeed done some solid
work while I have been sitting spinning theories with my friend! It's a
lesson in being practical, Mr. Mac."

"Ay, it's just that, Mr. Holmes," said the inspector with satisfaction.

"But this may all fit in with your theories," I remarked.

"That may or may not be. But let us hear the end, Mr. Mac. Was there
nothing to identify this man?"

"So little that it was evident that he had carefully guarded himself
against identification. There were no papers or letters, and no marking
upon the clothes. A cycle map of the county lay on his bedroom table. He
had left the hotel after breakfast yesterday morning on his bicycle, and
no more was heard of him until our inquiries."

"That's what puzzles me, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "If the fellow
did not want the hue and cry raised over him, one would imagine that he
would have returned and remained at the hotel as an inoffensive tourist.
As it is, he must know that he will be reported to the police by the
hotel manager and that his disappearance will be connected with the
murder."

"So one would imagine. Still, he has been justified of his wisdom up
to date, at any rate, since he has not been taken. But his
description--what of that?"

MacDonald referred to his notebook. "Here we have it so far as they
could give it. They don't seem to have taken any very particular stock
of him; but still the porter, the clerk, and the chambermaid are all
agreed that this about covers the points. He was a man about five foot
nine in height, fifty or so years of age, his hair slightly grizzled, a
grayish moustache, a curved nose, and a face which all of them described
as fierce and forbidding."

"Well, bar the expression, that might almost be a description of Douglas
himself," said Holmes. "He is just over fifty, with grizzled hair and
moustache, and about the same height. Did you get anything else?"

"He was dressed in a heavy gray suit with a reefer jacket, and he wore a
short yellow overcoat and a soft cap."

"What about the shotgun?"

"It is less than two feet long. It could very well have fitted into
his valise. He could have carried it inside his overcoat without
difficulty."

"And how do you consider that all this bears upon the general case?"

"Well, Mr. Holmes," said MacDonald, "when we have got our man--and you
may be sure that I had his description on the wires within five minutes
of hearing it--we shall be better able to judge. But, even as it stands,
we have surely gone a long way. We know that an American calling himself
Hargrave came to Tunbridge Wells two days ago with bicycle and valise.
In the latter was a sawed-off shotgun; so he came with the deliberate
purpose of crime. Yesterday morning he set off for this place on his
bicycle, with his gun concealed in his overcoat. No one saw him arrive,
so far as we can learn; but he need not pass through the village
to reach the park gates, and there are many cyclists upon the road.
Presumably he at once concealed his cycle among the laurels where it
was found, and possibly lurked there himself, with his eye on the house,
waiting for Mr. Douglas to come out. The shotgun is a strange weapon to
use inside a house; but he had intended to use it outside, and there it
has very obvious advantages, as it would be impossible to miss with it,
and the sound of shots is so common in an English sporting neighbourhood
that no particular notice would be taken."

"That is all very clear," said Holmes.

"Well, Mr. Douglas did not appear. What was he to do next? He left his
bicycle and approached the house in the twilight. He found the bridge
down and no one about. He took his chance, intending, no doubt, to make
some excuse if he met anyone. He met no one. He slipped into the first
room that he saw, and concealed himself behind the curtain. Thence he
could see the drawbridge go up, and he knew that his only escape was
through the moat. He waited until quarter-past eleven, when Mr. Douglas
upon his usual nightly round came into the room. He shot him and
escaped, as arranged. He was aware that the bicycle would be described
by the hotel people and be a clue against him; so he left it there and
made his way by some other means to London or to some safe hiding place
which he had already arranged. How is that, Mr. Holmes?"

"Well, Mr. Mac, it is very good and very clear so far as it goes. That
is your end of the story. My end is that the crime was committed half an
hour earlier than reported; that Mrs. Douglas and Barker are both in
a conspiracy to conceal something; that they aided the murderer's
escape--or at least that they reached the room before he escaped--and
that they fabricated evidence of his escape through the window, whereas
in all probability they had themselves let him go by lowering the
bridge. That's my reading of the first half."

The two detectives shook their heads.

"Well, Mr. Holmes, if this is true, we only tumble out of one mystery
into another," said the London inspector.

"And in some ways a worse one," added White Mason. "The lady has never
been in America in all her life. What possible connection could she have
with an American assassin which would cause her to shelter him?"

"I freely admit the difficulties," said Holmes. "I propose to make a
little investigation of my own to-night, and it is just possible that it
may contribute something to the common cause."

"Can we help you, Mr. Holmes?"

"No, no! Darkness and Dr. Watson's umbrella--my wants are simple. And
Ames, the faithful Ames, no doubt he will stretch a point for me. All my
lines of thought lead me back invariably to the one basic question--why
should an athletic man develop his frame upon so unnatural an instrument
as a single dumb-bell?"

It was late that night when Holmes returned from his solitary excursion.
We slept in a double-bedded room, which was the best that the little
country inn could do for us. I was already asleep when I was partly
awakened by his entrance.

"Well, Holmes," I murmured, "have you found anything out?"

He stood beside me in silence, his candle in his hand. Then the tall,
lean figure inclined towards me. "I say, Watson," he whispered, "would
you be afraid to sleep in the same room with a lunatic, a man with
softening of the brain, an idiot whose mind has lost its grip?"

"Not in the least," I answered in astonishment.

"Ah, that's lucky," he said, and not another word would he utter that
night.




Chapter 7--The Solution



Next morning, after breakfast, we found Inspector MacDonald and White
Mason seated in close consultation in the small parlour of the local
police sergeant. On the table in front of them were piled a number of
letters and telegrams, which they were carefully sorting and docketing.
Three had been placed on one side.

"Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist?" Holmes asked cheerfully.
"What is the latest news of the ruffian?"

MacDonald pointed ruefully to his heap of correspondence.

"He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham, Southampton,
Derby, East Ham, Richmond, and fourteen other places. In three of
them--East Ham, Leicester, and Liverpool--there is a clear case against
him, and he has actually been arrested. The country seems to be full of
the fugitives with yellow coats."

"Dear me!" said Holmes sympathetically. "Now, Mr. Mac and you, Mr. White
Mason, I wish to give you a very earnest piece of advice. When I went
into this case with you I bargained, as you will no doubt remember, that
I should not present you with half-proved theories, but that I should
retain and work out my own ideas until I had satisfied myself that they
were correct. For this reason I am not at the present moment telling you
all that is in my mind. On the other hand, I said that I would play the
game fairly by you, and I do not think it is a fair game to allow you
for one unnecessary moment to waste your energies upon a profitless
task. Therefore I am here to advise you this morning, and my advice to
you is summed up in three words--abandon the case."

MacDonald and White Mason stared in amazement at their celebrated
colleague.

"You consider it hopeless!" cried the inspector.

"I consider your case to be hopeless. I do not consider that it is
hopeless to arrive at the truth."

"But this cyclist. He is not an invention. We have his description, his
valise, his bicycle. The fellow must be somewhere. Why should we not get
him?"

"Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall get him; but
I would not have you waste your energies in East Ham or Liverpool. I am
sure that we can find some shorter cut to a result."

"You are holding something back. It's hardly fair of you, Mr. Holmes."
The inspector was annoyed.

"You know my methods of work, Mr. Mac. But I will hold it back for the
shortest time possible. I only wish to verify my details in one way,
which can very readily be done, and then I make my bow and return to
London, leaving my results entirely at your service. I owe you too much
to act otherwise; for in all my experience I cannot recall any more
singular and interesting study."

"This is clean beyond me, Mr. Holmes. We saw you when we returned from
Tunbridge Wells last night, and you were in general agreement with our
results. What has happened since then to give you a completely new idea
of the case?"

"Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would, some hours
last night at the Manor House."

"Well, what happened?"

"Ah, I can only give you a very general answer to that for the moment.
By the way, I have been reading a short but clear and interesting
account of the old building, purchasable at the modest sum of one penny
from the local tobacconist."

Here Holmes drew a small tract, embellished with a rude engraving of the
ancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.

"It immensely adds to the zest of an investigation, my dear Mr. Mac,
when one is in conscious sympathy with the historical atmosphere of
one's surroundings. Don't look so impatient; for I assure you that even
so bald an account as this raises some sort of picture of the past in
one's mind. Permit me to give you a sample. 'Erected in the fifth year
of the reign of James I, and standing upon the site of a much older
building, the Manor House of Birlstone presents one of the finest
surviving examples of the moated Jacobean residence--'"

"You are making fools of us, Mr. Holmes!"

"Tut, tut, Mr. Mac!--the first sign of temper I have detected in you.
Well, I won't read it verbatim, since you feel so strongly upon the
subject. But when I tell you that there is some account of the taking
of the place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of the concealment of
Charles for several days in the course of the Civil War, and finally
of a visit there by the second George, you will admit that there are
various associations of interest connected with this ancient house."

"I don't doubt it, Mr. Holmes; but that is no business of ours."

"Is it not? Is it not? Breadth of view, my dear Mr. Mac, is one of the
essentials of our profession. The interplay of ideas and the oblique
uses of knowledge are often of extraordinary interest. You will excuse
these remarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur of crime, is still
rather older and perhaps more experienced than yourself."

"I'm the first to admit that," said the detective heartily. "You get to
your point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-corner way of
doing it."

"Well, well, I'll drop past history and get down to present-day facts. I
called last night, as I have already said, at the Manor House. I did not
see either Barker or Mrs. Douglas. I saw no necessity to disturb them;
but I was pleased to hear that the lady was not visibly pining and that
she had partaken of an excellent dinner. My visit was specially made
to the good Mr. Ames, with whom I exchanged some amiabilities, which
culminated in his allowing me, without reference to anyone else, to sit
alone for a time in the study."

"What! With that?" I ejaculated.

"No, no, everything is now in order. You gave permission for that, Mr.
Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal state, and in it I
passed an instructive quarter of an hour."

"What were you doing?"

"Well, not to make a mystery of so simple a matter, I was looking for
the missing dumb-bell. It has always bulked rather large in my estimate
of the case. I ended by finding it."

"Where?"

"Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. Let me go a little
further, a very little further, and I will promise that you shall share
everything that I know."

"Well, we're bound to take you on your own terms," said the inspector;
"but when it comes to telling us to abandon the case--why in the name of
goodness should we abandon the case?"

"For the simple reason, my dear Mr. Mac, that you have not got the first
idea what it is that you are investigating."

"We are investigating the murder of Mr. John Douglas of Birlstone
Manor."

"Yes, yes, so you are. But don't trouble to trace the mysterious
gentleman upon the bicycle. I assure you that it won't help you."

"Then what do you suggest that we do?"

"I will tell you exactly what to do, if you will do it."

"Well, I'm bound to say I've always found you had reason behind all your
queer ways. I'll do what you advise."

"And you, Mr. White Mason?"

The country detective looked helplessly from one to the other. Holmes
and his methods were new to him. "Well, if it is good enough for the
inspector, it is good enough for me," he said at last.

"Capital!" said Holmes. "Well, then, I should recommend a nice, cheery
country walk for both of you. They tell me that the views from Birlstone
Ridge over the Weald are very remarkable. No doubt lunch could be got at
some suitable hostelry; though my ignorance of the country prevents me
from recommending one. In the evening, tired but happy--"

"Man, this is getting past a joke!" cried MacDonald, rising angrily from
his chair.

"Well, well, spend the day as you like," said Holmes, patting him
cheerfully upon the shoulder. "Do what you like and go where you will,
but meet me here before dusk without fail--without fail, Mr. Mac."

"That sounds more like sanity."

"All of it was excellent advice; but I don't insist, so long as you are
here when I need you. But now, before we part, I want you to write a
note to Mr. Barker."

"Well?"

"I'll dictate it, if you like. Ready?

"Dear Sir:

"It has struck me that it is our duty to drain the moat, in the hope
that we may find some--"

"It's impossible," said the inspector. "I've made inquiry."

"Tut, tut! My dear sir, please do what I ask you."

"Well, go on."

"--in the hope that we may find something which may bear upon our
investigation. I have made arrangements, and the workmen will be at work
early to-morrow morning diverting the stream--"

"Impossible!"

"--diverting the stream; so I thought it best to explain matters
beforehand.

"Now sign that, and send it by hand about four o'clock. At that hour we
shall meet again in this room. Until then we may each do what we like;
for I can assure you that this inquiry has come to a definite pause."

Evening was drawing in when we reassembled. Holmes was very serious in
his manner, myself curious, and the detectives obviously critical and
annoyed.

"Well, gentlemen," said my friend gravely, "I am asking you now to
put everything to the test with me, and you will judge for yourselves
whether the observations I have made justify the conclusions to which
I have come. It is a chill evening, and I do not know how long our
expedition may last; so I beg that you will wear your warmest coats.
It is of the first importance that we should be in our places before it
grows dark; so with your permission we shall get started at once."

We passed along the outer bounds of the Manor House park until we came
to a place where there was a gap in the rails which fenced it. Through
this we slipped, and then in the gathering gloom we followed Holmes
until we had reached a shrubbery which lies nearly opposite to the main
door and the drawbridge. The latter had not been raised. Holmes crouched
down behind the screen of laurels, and we all three followed his
example.

"Well, what are we to do now?" asked MacDonald with some gruffness.

"Possess our souls in patience and make as little noise as possible,"
Holmes answered.

"What are we here for at all? I really think that you might treat us
with more frankness."

Holmes laughed. "Watson insists that I am the dramatist in real life,"
said he. "Some touch of the artist wells up within me, and calls
insistently for a well-staged performance. Surely our profession, Mr.
Mac, would be a drab and sordid one if we did not sometimes set the
scene so as to glorify our results. The blunt accusation, the brutal tap
upon the shoulder--what can one make of such a denouement? But the quick
inference, the subtle trap, the clever forecast of coming events, the
triumphant vindication of bold theories--are these not the pride and the
justification of our life's work? At the present moment you thrill with
the glamour of the situation and the anticipation of the hunt. Where
would be that thrill if I had been as definite as a timetable? I only
ask a little patience, Mr. Mac, and all will be clear to you."

"Well, I hope the pride and justification and the rest of it will come
before we all get our death of cold," said the London detective with
comic resignation.

We all had good reason to join in the aspiration; for our vigil was a
long and bitter one. Slowly the shadows darkened over the long, sombre
face of the old house. A cold, damp reek from the moat chilled us to
the bones and set our teeth chattering. There was a single lamp over the
gateway and a steady globe of light in the fatal study. Everything else
was dark and still.

"How long is this to last?" asked the inspector finally. "And what is it
we are watching for?"

"I have no more notion than you how long it is to last," Holmes answered
with some asperity. "If criminals would always schedule their movements
like railway trains, it would certainly be more convenient for all of
us. As to what it is we--Well, THAT'S what we are watching for!"

As he spoke the bright, yellow light in the study was obscured by
somebody passing to and fro before it. The laurels among which we lay
were immediately opposite the window and not more than a hundred feet
from it. Presently it was thrown open with a whining of hinges, and we
could dimly see the dark outline of a man's head and shoulders looking
out into the gloom. For some minutes he peered forth in furtive,
stealthy fashion, as one who wishes to be assured that he is unobserved.
Then he leaned forward, and in the intense silence we were aware of the
soft lapping of agitated water. He seemed to be stirring up the moat
with something which he held in his hand. Then suddenly he hauled
something in as a fisherman lands a fish--some large, round object which
obscured the light as it was dragged through the open casement.

"Now!" cried Holmes. "Now!"

We were all upon our feet, staggering after him with our stiffened
limbs, while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang violently at the
bell. There was the rasping of bolts from the other side, and the amazed
Ames stood in the entrance. Holmes brushed him aside without a word and,
followed by all of us, rushed into the room which had been occupied by
the man whom we had been watching.

The oil lamp on the table represented the glow which we had seen from
outside. It was now in the hand of Cecil Barker, who held it towards us
as we entered. Its light shone upon his strong, resolute, clean-shaved
face and his menacing eyes.

"What the devil is the meaning of all this?" he cried. "What are you
after, anyhow?"

Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a sodden bundle
tied together with cord which lay where it had been thrust under the
writing table.

"This is what we are after, Mr. Barker--this bundle, weighted with a
dumb-bell, which you have just raised from the bottom of the moat."

Barker stared at Holmes with amazement in his face. "How in thunder came
you to know anything about it?" he asked.

"Simply that I put it there."

"You put it there! You!"

"Perhaps I should have said 'replaced it there,'" said Holmes. "You will
remember, Inspector MacDonald, that I was somewhat struck by the absence
of a dumb-bell. I drew your attention to it; but with the pressure of
other events you had hardly the time to give it the consideration which
would have enabled you to draw deductions from it. When water is near
and a weight is missing it is not a very far-fetched supposition that
something has been sunk in the water. The idea was at least worth
testing; so with the help of Ames, who admitted me to the room, and the
crook of Dr. Watson's umbrella, I was able last night to fish up and
inspect this bundle.

"It was of the first importance, however, that we should be able to
prove who placed it there. This we accomplished by the very obvious
device of announcing that the moat would be dried to-morrow, which had,
of course, the effect that whoever had hidden the bundle would most
certainly withdraw it the moment that darkness enabled him to do so. We
have no less than four witnesses as to who it was who took advantage
of the opportunity, and so, Mr. Barker, I think the word lies now with
you."

Sherlock Holmes put the sopping bundle upon the table beside the lamp
and undid the cord which bound it. From within he extracted a dumb-bell,
which he tossed down to its fellow in the corner. Next he drew forth a
pair of boots. "American, as you perceive," he remarked, pointing to
the toes. Then he laid upon the table a long, deadly, sheathed knife.
Finally he unravelled a bundle of clothing, comprising a complete set of
underclothes, socks, a gray tweed suit, and a short yellow overcoat.

"The clothes are commonplace," remarked Holmes, "save only the overcoat,
which is full of suggestive touches." He held it tenderly towards the
light. "Here, as you perceive, is the inner pocket prolonged into the
lining in such fashion as to give ample space for the truncated fowling
piece. The tailor's tab is on the neck--'Neal, Outfitter, Vermissa,
U.S.A.' I have spent an instructive afternoon in the rector's library,
and have enlarged my knowledge by adding the fact that Vermissa is a
flourishing little town at the head of one of the best known coal and
iron valleys in the United States. I have some recollection, Mr. Barker,
that you associated the coal districts with Mr. Douglas's first wife,
and it would surely not be too far-fetched an inference that the V.V.
upon the card by the dead body might stand for Vermissa Valley, or that
this very valley which sends forth emissaries of murder may be that
Valley of Fear of which we have heard. So much is fairly clear. And
now, Mr. Barker, I seem to be standing rather in the way of your
explanation."

It was a sight to see Cecil Barker's expressive face during this
exposition of the great detective. Anger, amazement, consternation, and
indecision swept over it in turn. Finally he took refuge in a somewhat
acrid irony.

"You know such a lot, Mr. Holmes, perhaps you had better tell us some
more," he sneered.

"I have no doubt that I could tell you a great deal more, Mr. Barker;
but it would come with a better grace from you."

"Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's any
secret here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give it away."

"Well, if you take that line, Mr. Barker," said the inspector quietly,
"we must just keep you in sight until we have the warrant and can hold
you."

"You can do what you damn please about that," said Barker defiantly.

The proceedings seemed to have come to a definite end so far as he was
concerned; for one had only to look at that granite face to realize that
no peine forte et dure would ever force him to plead against his will.
The deadlock was broken, however, by a woman's voice. Mrs. Douglas had
been standing listening at the half opened door, and now she entered the
room.

"You have done enough for now, Cecil," said she. "Whatever comes of it
in the future, you have done enough."

"Enough and more than enough," remarked Sherlock Holmes gravely. "I have
every sympathy with you, madam, and should strongly urge you to have
some confidence in the common sense of our jurisdiction and to take the
police voluntarily into your complete confidence. It may be that I am
myself at fault for not following up the hint which you conveyed to me
through my friend, Dr. Watson; but, at that time I had every reason to
believe that you were directly concerned in the crime. Now I am
assured that this is not so. At the same time, there is much that is
unexplained, and I should strongly recommend that you ask Mr. Douglas to
tell us his own story."

Mrs. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at Holmes's words. The
detectives and I must have echoed it, when we were aware of a man who
seemed to have emerged from the wall, who advanced now from the gloom
of the corner in which he had appeared. Mrs. Douglas turned, and in
an instant her arms were round him. Barker had seized his outstretched
hand.

"It's best this way, Jack," his wife repeated; "I am sure that it is
best."

"Indeed, yes, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes, "I am sure that you
will find it best."

The man stood blinking at us with the dazed look of one who comes from
the dark into the light. It was a remarkable face, bold gray eyes, a
strong, short-clipped, grizzled moustache, a square, projecting chin,
and a humorous mouth. He took a good look at us all, and then to my
amazement he advanced to me and handed me a bundle of paper.

"I've heard of you," said he in a voice which was not quite English and
not quite American, but was altogether mellow and pleasing. "You are the
historian of this bunch. Well, Dr. Watson, you've never had such a story
as that pass through your hands before, and I'll lay my last dollar on
that. Tell it your own way; but there are the facts, and you can't miss
the public so long as you have those. I've been cooped up two days, and
I've spent the daylight hours--as much daylight as I could get in that
rat trap--in putting the thing into words. You're welcome to them--you
and your public. There's the story of the Valley of Fear."

"That's the past, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes quietly. "What we
desire now is to hear your story of the present."

"You'll have it, sir," said Douglas. "May I smoke as I talk? Well, thank
you, Mr. Holmes. You're a smoker yourself, if I remember right, and
you'll guess what it is to be sitting for two days with tobacco in your
pocket and afraid that the smell will give you away." He leaned against
the mantelpiece and sucked at the cigar which Holmes had handed him.
"I've heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I never guessed that I should meet you.
But before you are through with that," he nodded at my papers, "you will
say I've brought you something fresh."
