"Would you never forgive me, then, Nancy--never think well of me, let
what would happen--would you never think the present made amends for
the past?  Not if I turned a good fellow, and gave up everything you
didn't like?"

Godfrey was half conscious that this sudden opportunity of speaking to
Nancy alone had driven him beside himself; but blind feeling had got
the mastery of his tongue.  Nancy really felt much agitated by the
possibility Godfrey's words suggested, but this very pressure of
emotion that she was in danger of finding too strong for her roused all
her power of self-command.

"I should be glad to see a good change in anybody, Mr. Godfrey," she
answered, with the slightest discernible difference of tone, "but it
'ud be better if no change was wanted."

"You're very hard-hearted, Nancy," said Godfrey, pettishly.  "You might
encourage me to be a better fellow.  I'm very miserable--but you've no
feeling."

"I think those have the least feeling that act wrong to begin with,"
said Nancy, sending out a flash in spite of herself. Godfrey was
delighted with that little flash, and would have liked to go on and
make her quarrel with him; Nancy was so exasperatingly quiet and firm.
But she was not indifferent to him _yet_, though--

The entrance of Priscilla, bustling forward and saying, "Dear heart
alive, child, let us look at this gown," cut off Godfrey's hopes of a
quarrel.

"I suppose I must go now," he said to Priscilla.

"It's no matter to me whether you go or stay," said that frank lady,
searching for something in her pocket, with a preoccupied brow.

"Do _you_ want me to go?"  said Godfrey, looking at Nancy, who was now
standing up by Priscilla's order.

"As you like," said Nancy, trying to recover all her former coldness,
and looking down carefully at the hem of her gown.

"Then I like to stay," said Godfrey, with a reckless determination to
get as much of this joy as he could to-night, and think nothing of the
morrow.



CHAPTER XII

While Godfrey Cass was taking draughts of forgetfulness from the sweet
presence of Nancy, willingly losing all sense of that hidden bond which
at other moments galled and fretted him so as to mingle irritation with
the very sunshine, Godfrey's wife was walking with slow uncertain steps
through the snow-covered Raveloe lanes, carrying her child in her arms.

This journey on New Year's Eve was a premeditated act of vengeance
which she had kept in her heart ever since Godfrey, in a fit of
passion, had told her he would sooner die than acknowledge her as his
wife.  There would be a great party at the Red House on New Year's Eve,
she knew: her husband would be smiling and smiled upon, hiding _her_
existence in the darkest corner of his heart.  But she would mar his
pleasure: she would go in her dingy rags, with her faded face, once as
handsome as the best, with her little child that had its father's hair
and eyes, and disclose herself to the Squire as his eldest son's wife.
It is seldom that the miserable can help regarding their misery as a
wrong inflicted by those who are less miserable.  Molly knew that the
cause of her dingy rags was not her husband's neglect, but the demon
Opium to whom she was enslaved, body and soul, except in the lingering
mother's tenderness that refused to give him her hungry child.  She
knew this well; and yet, in the moments of wretched unbenumbed
consciousness, the sense of her want and degradation transformed itself
continually into bitterness towards Godfrey.  _He_ was well off; and if
she had her rights she would be well off too.  The belief that he
repented his marriage, and suffered from it, only aggravated her
vindictiveness. Just and self-reproving thoughts do not come to us too
thickly, even in the purest air, and with the best lessons of heaven
and earth; how should those white-winged delicate messengers make their
way to Molly's poisoned chamber, inhabited by no higher memories than
those of a barmaid's paradise of pink ribbons and gentlemen's jokes?

She had set out at an early hour, but had lingered on the road,
inclined by her indolence to believe that if she waited under a warm
shed the snow would cease to fall.  She had waited longer than she
knew, and now that she found herself belated in the snow-hidden
ruggedness of the long lanes, even the animation of a vindictive
purpose could not keep her spirit from failing.  It was seven o'clock,
and by this time she was not very far from Raveloe, but she was not
familiar enough with those monotonous lanes to know how near she was to
her journey's end.  She needed comfort, and she knew but one
comforter--the familiar demon in her bosom; but she hesitated a moment,
after drawing out the black remnant, before she raised it to her lips.
In that moment the mother's love pleaded for painful consciousness
rather than oblivion--pleaded to be left in aching weariness, rather
than to have the encircling arms benumbed so that they could not feel
the dear burden.  In another moment Molly had flung something away, but
it was not the black remnant--it was an empty phial.  And she walked on
again under the breaking cloud, from which there came now and then the
light of a quickly veiled star, for a freezing wind had sprung up since
the snowing had ceased.  But she walked always more and more drowsily,
and clutched more and more automatically the sleeping child at her
bosom.

Slowly the demon was working his will, and cold and weariness were his
helpers.  Soon she felt nothing but a supreme immediate longing that
curtained off all futurity--the longing to lie down and sleep.  She had
arrived at a spot where her footsteps were no longer checked by a
hedgerow, and she had wandered vaguely, unable to distinguish any
objects, notwithstanding the wide whiteness around her, and the growing
starlight.  She sank down against a straggling furze bush, an easy
pillow enough; and the bed of snow, too, was soft.  She did not feel
that the bed was cold, and did not heed whether the child would wake
and cry for her.  But her arms had not yet relaxed their instinctive
clutch; and the little one slumbered on as gently as if it had been
rocked in a lace-trimmed cradle.

But the complete torpor came at last: the fingers lost their tension,
the arms unbent; then the little head fell away from the bosom, and the
blue eyes opened wide on the cold starlight.  At first there was a
little peevish cry of "mammy", and an effort to regain the pillowing
arm and bosom; but mammy's ear was deaf, and the pillow seemed to be
slipping away backward.  Suddenly, as the child rolled downward on its
mother's knees, all wet with snow, its eyes were caught by a bright
glancing light on the white ground, and, with the ready transition of
infancy, it was immediately absorbed in watching the bright living
thing running towards it, yet never arriving.  That bright living thing
must be caught; and in an instant the child had slipped on all-fours,
and held out one little hand to catch the gleam.  But the gleam would
not be caught in that way, and now the head was held up to see where
the cunning gleam came from.  It came from a very bright place; and the
little one, rising on its legs, toddled through the snow, the old grimy
shawl in which it was wrapped trailing behind it, and the queer little
bonnet dangling at its back--toddled on to the open door of Silas
Marner's cottage, and right up to the warm hearth, where there was a
bright fire of logs and sticks, which had thoroughly warmed the old
sack (Silas's greatcoat) spread out on the bricks to dry.  The little
one, accustomed to be left to itself for long hours without notice from
its mother, squatted down on the sack, and spread its tiny hands
towards the blaze, in perfect contentment, gurgling and making many
inarticulate communications to the cheerful fire, like a new-hatched
gosling beginning to find itself comfortable.  But presently the warmth
had a lulling effect, and the little golden head sank down on the old
sack, and the blue eyes were veiled by their delicate half-transparent
lids.

But where was Silas Marner while this strange visitor had come to his
hearth?  He was in the cottage, but he did not see the child. During
the last few weeks, since he had lost his money, he had contracted the
habit of opening his door and looking out from time to time, as if he
thought that his money might be somehow coming back to him, or that
some trace, some news of it, might be mysteriously on the road, and be
caught by the listening ear or the straining eye.  It was chiefly at
night, when he was not occupied in his loom, that he fell into this
repetition of an act for which he could have assigned no definite
purpose, and which can hardly be understood except by those who have
undergone a bewildering separation from a supremely loved object.  In
the evening twilight, and later whenever the night was not dark, Silas
looked out on that narrow prospect round the Stone-pits, listening and
gazing, not with hope, but with mere yearning and unrest.

This morning he had been told by some of his neighbours that it was New
Year's Eve, and that he must sit up and hear the old year rung out and
the new rung in, because that was good luck, and might bring his money
back again.  This was only a friendly Raveloe-way of jesting with the
half-crazy oddities of a miser, but it had perhaps helped to throw
Silas into a more than usually excited state.  Since the on-coming of
twilight he had opened his door again and again, though only to shut it
immediately at seeing all distance veiled by the falling snow.  But the
last time he opened it the snow had ceased, and the clouds were parting
here and there.  He stood and listened, and gazed for a long
while--there was really something on the road coming towards him then,
but he caught no sign of it; and the stillness and the wide trackless
snow seemed to narrow his solitude, and touched his yearning with the
chill of despair.  He went in again, and put his right hand on the
latch of the door to close it--but he did not close it: he was
arrested, as he had been already since his loss, by the invisible wand
of catalepsy, and stood like a graven image, with wide but sightless
eyes, holding open his door, powerless to resist either the good or the
evil that might enter there.

When Marner's sensibility returned, he continued the action which had
been arrested, and closed his door, unaware of the chasm in his
consciousness, unaware of any intermediate change, except that the
light had grown dim, and that he was chilled and faint.  He thought he
had been too long standing at the door and looking out.  Turning
towards the hearth, where the two logs had fallen apart, and sent forth
only a red uncertain glimmer, he seated himself on his fireside chair,
and was stooping to push his logs together, when, to his blurred
vision, it seemed as if there were gold on the floor in front of the
hearth.  Gold!--his own gold--brought back to him as mysteriously as it
had been taken away!  He felt his heart begin to beat violently, and
for a few moments he was unable to stretch out his hand and grasp the
restored treasure.  The heap of gold seemed to glow and get larger
beneath his agitated gaze.  He leaned forward at last, and stretched
forth his hand; but instead of the hard coin with the familiar
resisting outline, his fingers encountered soft warm curls.  In utter
amazement, Silas fell on his knees and bent his head low to examine the
marvel: it was a sleeping child--a round, fair thing, with soft yellow
rings all over its head.  Could this be his little sister come back to
him in a dream--his little sister whom he had carried about in his arms
for a year before she died, when he was a small boy without shoes or
stockings?  That was the first thought that darted across Silas's blank
wonderment.  _Was_ it a dream?  He rose to his feet again, pushed his
logs together, and, throwing on some dried leaves and sticks, raised a
flame; but the flame did not disperse the vision--it only lit up more
distinctly the little round form of the child, and its shabby clothing.
It was very much like his little sister. Silas sank into his chair
powerless, under the double presence of an inexplicable surprise and a
hurrying influx of memories.  How and when had the child come in
without his knowledge?  He had never been beyond the door.  But along
with that question, and almost thrusting it away, there was a vision of
the old home and the old streets leading to Lantern Yard--and within
that vision another, of the thoughts which had been present with him in
those far-off scenes. The thoughts were strange to him now, like old
friendships impossible to revive; and yet he had a dreamy feeling that
this child was somehow a message come to him from that far-off life: it
stirred fibres that had never been moved in Raveloe--old quiverings of
tenderness--old impressions of awe at the presentiment of some Power
presiding over his life; for his imagination had not yet extricated
itself from the sense of mystery in the child's sudden presence, and
had formed no conjectures of ordinary natural means by which the event
could have been brought about.

But there was a cry on the hearth: the child had awaked, and Marner
stooped to lift it on his knee.  It clung round his neck, and burst
louder and louder into that mingling of inarticulate cries with "mammy"
by which little children express the bewilderment of waking.  Silas
pressed it to him, and almost unconsciously uttered sounds of hushing
tenderness, while he bethought himself that some of his porridge, which
had got cool by the dying fire, would do to feed the child with if it
were only warmed up a little.

He had plenty to do through the next hour.  The porridge, sweetened
with some dry brown sugar from an old store which he had refrained from
using for himself, stopped the cries of the little one, and made her
lift her blue eyes with a wide quiet gaze at Silas, as he put the spoon
into her mouth.  Presently she slipped from his knee and began to
toddle about, but with a pretty stagger that made Silas jump up and
follow her lest she should fall against anything that would hurt her.
But she only fell in a sitting posture on the ground, and began to pull
at her boots, looking up at him with a crying face as if the boots hurt
her.  He took her on his knee again, but it was some time before it
occurred to Silas's dull bachelor mind that the wet boots were the
grievance, pressing on her warm ankles.  He got them off with
difficulty, and baby was at once happily occupied with the primary
mystery of her own toes, inviting Silas, with much chuckling, to
consider the mystery too.  But the wet boots had at last suggested to
Silas that the child had been walking on the snow, and this roused him
from his entire oblivion of any ordinary means by which it could have
entered or been brought into his house.  Under the prompting of this
new idea, and without waiting to form conjectures, he raised the child
in his arms, and went to the door.  As soon as he had opened it, there
was the cry of "mammy" again, which Silas had not heard since the
child's first hungry waking.  Bending forward, he could just discern
the marks made by the little feet on the virgin snow, and he followed
their track to the furze bushes.  "Mammy!"  the little one cried again
and again, stretching itself forward so as almost to escape from
Silas's arms, before he himself was aware that there was something more
than the bush before him--that there was a human body, with the head
sunk low in the furze, and half-covered with the shaken snow.



CHAPTER XIII

It was after the early supper-time at the Red House, and the
entertainment was in that stage when bashfulness itself had passed into
easy jollity, when gentlemen, conscious of unusual accomplishments,
could at length be prevailed on to dance a hornpipe, and when the
Squire preferred talking loudly, scattering snuff, and patting his
visitors' backs, to sitting longer at the whist-table--a choice
exasperating to uncle Kimble, who, being always volatile in sober
business hours, became intense and bitter over cards and brandy,
shuffled before his adversary's deal with a glare of suspicion, and
turned up a mean trump-card with an air of inexpressible disgust, as if
in a world where such things could happen one might as well enter on a
course of reckless profligacy. When the evening had advanced to this
pitch of freedom and enjoyment, it was usual for the servants, the
heavy duties of supper being well over, to get their share of amusement
by coming to look on at the dancing; so that the back regions of the
house were left in solitude.

There were two doors by which the White Parlour was entered from the
hall, and they were both standing open for the sake of air; but the
lower one was crowded with the servants and villagers, and only the
upper doorway was left free.  Bob Cass was figuring in a hornpipe, and
his father, very proud of this lithe son, whom he repeatedly declared
to be just like himself in his young days in a tone that implied this
to be the very highest stamp of juvenile merit, was the centre of a
group who had placed themselves opposite the performer, not far from
the upper door.  Godfrey was standing a little way off, not to admire
his brother's dancing, but to keep sight of Nancy, who was seated in
the group, near her father.  He stood aloof, because he wished to avoid
suggesting himself as a subject for the Squire's fatherly jokes in
connection with matrimony and Miss Nancy Lammeter's beauty, which were
likely to become more and more explicit.  But he had the prospect of
dancing with her again when the hornpipe was concluded, and in the
meanwhile it was very pleasant to get long glances at her quite
unobserved.

But when Godfrey was lifting his eyes from one of those long glances,
they encountered an object as startling to him at that moment as if it
had been an apparition from the dead.  It _was_ an apparition from that
hidden life which lies, like a dark by-street, behind the goodly
ornamented facade that meets the sunlight and the gaze of respectable
admirers.  It was his own child, carried in Silas Marner's arms.  That
was his instantaneous impression, unaccompanied by doubt, though he had
not seen the child for months past; and when the hope was rising that
he might possibly be mistaken, Mr. Crackenthorp and Mr. Lammeter had
already advanced to Silas, in astonishment at this strange advent.
Godfrey joined them immediately, unable to rest without hearing every
word--trying to control himself, but conscious that if any one noticed
him, they must see that he was white-lipped and trembling.

But now all eyes at that end of the room were bent on Silas Marner; the
Squire himself had risen, and asked angrily, "How's this?--what's
this?--what do you do coming in here in this way?"

"I'm come for the doctor--I want the doctor," Silas had said, in the
first moment, to Mr. Crackenthorp.

"Why, what's the matter, Marner?"  said the rector.  "The doctor's
here; but say quietly what you want him for."

"It's a woman," said Silas, speaking low, and half-breathlessly, just
as Godfrey came up.  "She's dead, I think--dead in the snow at the
Stone-pits--not far from my door."

Godfrey felt a great throb: there was one terror in his mind at that
moment: it was, that the woman might _not_ be dead.  That was an evil
terror--an ugly inmate to have found a nestling-place in Godfrey's
kindly disposition; but no disposition is a security from evil wishes
to a man whose happiness hangs on duplicity.

"Hush, hush!"  said Mr. Crackenthorp.  "Go out into the hall there.
I'll fetch the doctor to you.  Found a woman in the snow--and thinks
she's dead," he added, speaking low to the Squire. "Better say as
little about it as possible: it will shock the ladies.  Just tell them
a poor woman is ill from cold and hunger. I'll go and fetch Kimble."

By this time, however, the ladies had pressed forward, curious to know
what could have brought the solitary linen-weaver there under such
strange circumstances, and interested in the pretty child, who, half
alarmed and half attracted by the brightness and the numerous company,
now frowned and hid her face, now lifted up her head again and looked
round placably, until a touch or a coaxing word brought back the frown,
and made her bury her face with new determination.

"What child is it?"  said several ladies at once, and, among the rest,
Nancy Lammeter, addressing Godfrey.

"I don't know--some poor woman's who has been found in the snow, I
believe," was the answer Godfrey wrung from himself with a terrible
effort.  ("After all, _am_ I certain?"  he hastened to add, silently,
in anticipation of his own conscience.)

"Why, you'd better leave the child here, then, Master Marner," said
good-natured Mrs. Kimble, hesitating, however, to take those dingy
clothes into contact with her own ornamented satin bodice. "I'll tell
one o' the girls to fetch it."

"No--no--I can't part with it, I can't let it go," said Silas,
abruptly.  "It's come to me--I've a right to keep it."

The proposition to take the child from him had come to Silas quite
unexpectedly, and his speech, uttered under a strong sudden impulse,
was almost like a revelation to himself: a minute before, he had no
distinct intention about the child.

"Did you ever hear the like?"  said Mrs. Kimble, in mild surprise, to
her neighbour.

"Now, ladies, I must trouble you to stand aside," said Mr. Kimble,
coming from the card-room, in some bitterness at the interruption, but
drilled by the long habit of his profession into obedience to
unpleasant calls, even when he was hardly sober.

"It's a nasty business turning out now, eh, Kimble?"  said the Squire.
"He might ha' gone for your young fellow--the 'prentice, there--what's
his name?"

"Might?  aye--what's the use of talking about might?"  growled uncle
Kimble, hastening out with Marner, and followed by Mr. Crackenthorp and
Godfrey.  "Get me a pair of thick boots, Godfrey, will you?  And stay,
let somebody run to Winthrop's and fetch Dolly--she's the best woman to
get.  Ben was here himself before supper; is he gone?"

"Yes, sir, I met him," said Marner; "but I couldn't stop to tell him
anything, only I said I was going for the doctor, and he said the
doctor was at the Squire's.  And I made haste and ran, and there was
nobody to be seen at the back o' the house, and so I went in to where
the company was."

The child, no longer distracted by the bright light and the smiling
women's faces, began to cry and call for "mammy", though always
clinging to Marner, who had apparently won her thorough confidence.
Godfrey had come back with the boots, and felt the cry as if some fibre
were drawn tight within him.

"I'll go," he said, hastily, eager for some movement; "I'll go and
fetch the woman--Mrs. Winthrop."

"Oh, pooh--send somebody else," said uncle Kimble, hurrying away with
Marner.

"You'll let me know if I can be of any use, Kimble," said Mr.
Crackenthorp.  But the doctor was out of hearing.

Godfrey, too, had disappeared: he was gone to snatch his hat and coat,
having just reflection enough to remember that he must not look like a
madman; but he rushed out of the house into the snow without heeding
his thin shoes.

In a few minutes he was on his rapid way to the Stone-pits by the side
of Dolly, who, though feeling that she was entirely in her place in
encountering cold and snow on an errand of mercy, was much concerned at
a young gentleman's getting his feet wet under a like impulse.

"You'd a deal better go back, sir," said Dolly, with respectful
compassion.  "You've no call to catch cold; and I'd ask you if you'd be
so good as tell my husband to come, on your way back--he's at the
Rainbow, I doubt--if you found him anyway sober enough to be o' use.
Or else, there's Mrs. Snell 'ud happen send the boy up to fetch and
carry, for there may be things wanted from the doctor's."

"No, I'll stay, now I'm once out--I'll stay outside here," said
Godfrey, when they came opposite Marner's cottage.  "You can come and
tell me if I can do anything."

"Well, sir, you're very good: you've a tender heart," said Dolly, going
to the door.

Godfrey was too painfully preoccupied to feel a twinge of self-reproach
at this undeserved praise.  He walked up and down, unconscious that he
was plunging ankle-deep in snow, unconscious of everything but
trembling suspense about what was going on in the cottage, and the
effect of each alternative on his future lot.  No, not quite
unconscious of everything else.  Deeper down, and half-smothered by
passionate desire and dread, there was the sense that he ought not to
be waiting on these alternatives; that he ought to accept the
consequences of his deeds, own the miserable wife, and fulfil the
claims of the helpless child.  But he had not moral courage enough to
contemplate that active renunciation of Nancy as possible for him: he
had only conscience and heart enough to make him for ever uneasy under
the weakness that forbade the renunciation.  And at this moment his
mind leaped away from all restraint toward the sudden prospect of
deliverance from his long bondage.

"Is she dead?"  said the voice that predominated over every other
within him.  "If she is, I may marry Nancy; and then I shall be a good
fellow in future, and have no secrets, and the child--shall be taken
care of somehow."  But across that vision came the other
possibility--"She may live, and then it's all up with me."

Godfrey never knew how long it was before the door of the cottage
opened and Mr. Kimble came out.  He went forward to meet his uncle,
prepared to suppress the agitation he must feel, whatever news he was
to hear.

"I waited for you, as I'd come so far," he said, speaking first.

"Pooh, it was nonsense for you to come out: why didn't you send one of
the men?  There's nothing to be done.  She's dead--has been dead for
hours, I should say."

"What sort of woman is she?"  said Godfrey, feeling the blood rush to
his face.

"A young woman, but emaciated, with long black hair.  Some
vagrant--quite in rags.  She's got a wedding-ring on, however.  They
must fetch her away to the workhouse to-morrow.  Come, come along."

"I want to look at her," said Godfrey.  "I think I saw such a woman
yesterday.  I'll overtake you in a minute or two."

Mr. Kimble went on, and Godfrey turned back to the cottage.  He cast
only one glance at the dead face on the pillow, which Dolly had
smoothed with decent care; but he remembered that last look at his
unhappy hated wife so well, that at the end of sixteen years every line
in the worn face was present to him when he told the full story of this
night.

He turned immediately towards the hearth, where Silas Marner sat
lulling the child.  She was perfectly quiet now, but not asleep--only
soothed by sweet porridge and warmth into that wide-gazing calm which
makes us older human beings, with our inward turmoil, feel a certain
awe in the presence of a little child, such as we feel before some
quiet majesty or beauty in the earth or sky--before a steady glowing
planet, or a full-flowered eglantine, or the bending trees over a
silent pathway.  The wide-open blue eyes looked up at Godfrey's without
any uneasiness or sign of recognition: the child could make no visible
audible claim on its father; and the father felt a strange mixture of
feelings, a conflict of regret and joy, that the pulse of that little
heart had no response for the half-jealous yearning in his own, when
the blue eyes turned away from him slowly, and fixed themselves on the
weaver's queer face, which was bent low down to look at them, while the
small hand began to pull Marner's withered cheek with loving
disfiguration.

"You'll take the child to the parish to-morrow?"  asked Godfrey,
speaking as indifferently as he could.

"Who says so?"  said Marner, sharply.  "Will they make me take her?"

"Why, you wouldn't like to keep her, should you--an old bachelor like
you?"

"Till anybody shows they've a right to take her away from me," said
Marner.  "The mother's dead, and I reckon it's got no father: it's a
lone thing--and I'm a lone thing.  My money's gone, I don't know
where--and this is come from I don't know where.  I know nothing--I'm
partly mazed."

"Poor little thing!"  said Godfrey.  "Let me give something towards
finding it clothes."

He had put his hand in his pocket and found half-a-guinea, and,
thrusting it into Silas's hand, he hurried out of the cottage to
overtake Mr. Kimble.

"Ah, I see it's not the same woman I saw," he said, as he came up.
"It's a pretty little child: the old fellow seems to want to keep it;
that's strange for a miser like him.  But I gave him a trifle to help
him out: the parish isn't likely to quarrel with him for the right to
keep the child."

"No; but I've seen the time when I might have quarrelled with him for
it myself.  It's too late now, though.  If the child ran into the fire,
your aunt's too fat to overtake it: she could only sit and grunt like
an alarmed sow.  But what a fool you are, Godfrey, to come out in your
dancing shoes and stockings in this way--and you one of the beaux of
the evening, and at your own house!  What do you mean by such freaks,
young fellow?  Has Miss Nancy been cruel, and do you want to spite her
by spoiling your pumps?"

"Oh, everything has been disagreeable to-night.  I was tired to death
of jigging and gallanting, and that bother about the hornpipes.  And
I'd got to dance with the other Miss Gunn," said Godfrey, glad of the
subterfuge his uncle had suggested to him.

The prevarication and white lies which a mind that keeps itself
ambitiously pure is as uneasy under as a great artist under the false
touches that no eye detects but his own, are worn as lightly as mere
trimmings when once the actions have become a lie.

Godfrey reappeared in the White Parlour with dry feet, and, since the
truth must be told, with a sense of relief and gladness that was too
strong for painful thoughts to struggle with.  For could he not venture
now, whenever opportunity offered, to say the tenderest things to Nancy
Lammeter--to promise her and himself that he would always be just what
she would desire to see him?  There was no danger that his dead wife
would be recognized: those were not days of active inquiry and wide
report; and as for the registry of their marriage, that was a long way
off, buried in unturned pages, away from every one's interest but his
own.  Dunsey might betray him if he came back; but Dunsey might be won
to silence.

And when events turn out so much better for a man than he has had
reason to dread, is it not a proof that his conduct has been less
foolish and blameworthy than it might otherwise have appeared?  When we
are treated well, we naturally begin to think that we are not
altogether unmeritorious, and that it is only just we should treat
ourselves well, and not mar our own good fortune.  Where, after all,
would be the use of his confessing the past to Nancy Lammeter, and
throwing away his happiness?--nay, hers?  for he felt some confidence
that she loved him.  As for the child, he would see that it was cared
for: he would never forsake it; he would do everything but own it.
Perhaps it would be just as happy in life without being owned by its
father, seeing that nobody could tell how things would turn out, and
that--is there any other reason wanted?--well, then, that the father
would be much happier without owning the child.



CHAPTER XIV

There was a pauper's burial that week in Raveloe, and up Kench Yard at
Batherley it was known that the dark-haired woman with the fair child,
who had lately come to lodge there, was gone away again. That was all
the express note taken that Molly had disappeared from the eyes of men.
But the unwept death which, to the general lot, seemed as trivial as
the summer-shed leaf, was charged with the force of destiny to certain
human lives that we know of, shaping their joys and sorrows even to the
end.

Silas Marner's determination to keep the "tramp's child" was matter of
hardly less surprise and iterated talk in the village than the robbery
of his money.  That softening of feeling towards him which dated from
his misfortune, that merging of suspicion and dislike in a rather
contemptuous pity for him as lone and crazy, was now accompanied with a
more active sympathy, especially amongst the women.  Notable mothers,
who knew what it was to keep children "whole and sweet"; lazy mothers,
who knew what it was to be interrupted in folding their arms and
scratching their elbows by the mischievous propensities of children
just firm on their legs, were equally interested in conjecturing how a
lone man would manage with a two-year-old child on his hands, and were
equally ready with their suggestions: the notable chiefly telling him
what he had better do, and the lazy ones being emphatic in telling him
what he would never be able to do.

Among the notable mothers, Dolly Winthrop was the one whose neighbourly
offices were the most acceptable to Marner, for they were rendered
without any show of bustling instruction.  Silas had shown her the
half-guinea given to him by Godfrey, and had asked her what he should
do about getting some clothes for the child.

"Eh, Master Marner," said Dolly, "there's no call to buy, no more nor a
pair o' shoes; for I've got the little petticoats as Aaron wore five
years ago, and it's ill spending the money on them baby-clothes, for
the child 'ull grow like grass i' May, bless it--that it will."

And the same day Dolly brought her bundle, and displayed to Marner, one
by one, the tiny garments in their due order of succession, most of
them patched and darned, but clean and neat as fresh-sprung herbs.
This was the introduction to a great ceremony with soap and water, from
which Baby came out in new beauty, and sat on Dolly's knee, handling
her toes and chuckling and patting her palms together with an air of
having made several discoveries about herself, which she communicated
by alternate sounds of "gug-gug-gug", and "mammy".  The "mammy" was not
a cry of need or uneasiness: Baby had been used to utter it without
expecting either tender sound or touch to follow.

"Anybody 'ud think the angils in heaven couldn't be prettier," said
Dolly, rubbing the golden curls and kissing them.  "And to think of its
being covered wi' them dirty rags--and the poor mother--froze to death;
but there's Them as took care of it, and brought it to your door,
Master Marner.  The door was open, and it walked in over the snow, like
as if it had been a little starved robin.  Didn't you say the door was
open?"

"Yes," said Silas, meditatively.  "Yes--the door was open.  The money's
gone I don't know where, and this is come from I don't know where."

He had not mentioned to any one his unconsciousness of the child's
entrance, shrinking from questions which might lead to the fact he
himself suspected--namely, that he had been in one of his trances.

"Ah," said Dolly, with soothing gravity, "it's like the night and the
morning, and the sleeping and the waking, and the rain and the
harvest--one goes and the other comes, and we know nothing how nor
where.  We may strive and scrat and fend, but it's little we can do
arter all--the big things come and go wi' no striving o' our'n--they
do, that they do; and I think you're in the right on it to keep the
little un, Master Marner, seeing as it's been sent to you, though
there's folks as thinks different.  You'll happen be a bit moithered
with it while it's so little; but I'll come, and welcome, and see to it
for you: I've a bit o' time to spare most days, for when one gets up
betimes i' the morning, the clock seems to stan' still tow'rt ten,
afore it's time to go about the victual.  So, as I say, I'll come and
see to the child for you, and welcome."

"Thank you... kindly," said Silas, hesitating a little.  "I'll be glad
if you'll tell me things.  But," he added, uneasily, leaning forward to
look at Baby with some jealousy, as she was resting her head backward
against Dolly's arm, and eyeing him contentedly from a distance--"But I
want to do things for it myself, else it may get fond o' somebody else,
and not fond o' me.  I've been used to fending for myself in the
house--I can learn, I can learn."

"Eh, to be sure," said Dolly, gently.  "I've seen men as are wonderful
handy wi' children.  The men are awk'ard and contrairy mostly, God help
'em--but when the drink's out of 'em, they aren't unsensible, though
they're bad for leeching and bandaging--so fiery and unpatient.  You
see this goes first, next the skin," proceeded Dolly, taking up the
little shirt, and putting it on.

"Yes," said Marner, docilely, bringing his eyes very close, that they
might be initiated in the mysteries; whereupon Baby seized his head
with both her small arms, and put her lips against his face with
purring noises.

"See there," said Dolly, with a woman's tender tact, "she's fondest o'
you.  She wants to go o' your lap, I'll be bound.  Go, then: take her,
Master Marner; you can put the things on, and then you can say as
you've done for her from the first of her coming to you."

Marner took her on his lap, trembling with an emotion mysterious to
himself, at something unknown dawning on his life.  Thought and feeling
were so confused within him, that if he had tried to give them
utterance, he could only have said that the child was come instead of
the gold--that the gold had turned into the child.  He took the
garments from Dolly, and put them on under her teaching; interrupted,
of course, by Baby's gymnastics.

"There, then!  why, you take to it quite easy, Master Marner," said
Dolly; "but what shall you do when you're forced to sit in your loom?
For she'll get busier and mischievouser every day--she will, bless her.
It's lucky as you've got that high hearth i'stead of a grate, for that
keeps the fire more out of her reach: but if you've got anything as can
be spilt or broke, or as is fit to cut her fingers off, she'll be at
it--and it is but right you should know."

Silas meditated a little while in some perplexity.  "I'll tie her to
the leg o' the loom," he said at last--"tie her with a good long strip
o' something."

"Well, mayhap that'll do, as it's a little gell, for they're easier
persuaded to sit i' one place nor the lads.  I know what the lads are;
for I've had four--four I've had, God knows--and if you was to take and
tie 'em up, they'd make a fighting and a crying as if you was ringing
the pigs.  But I'll bring you my little chair, and some bits o' red rag
and things for her to play wi'; an' she'll sit and chatter to 'em as if
they was alive.  Eh, if it wasn't a sin to the lads to wish 'em made
different, bless 'em, I should ha' been glad for one of 'em to be a
little gell; and to think as I could ha' taught her to scour, and mend,
and the knitting, and everything. But I can teach 'em this little un,
Master Marner, when she gets old enough."

"But she'll be _my_ little un," said Marner, rather hastily. "She'll be
nobody else's."

"No, to be sure; you'll have a right to her, if you're a father to her,
and bring her up according.  But," added Dolly, coming to a point which
she had determined beforehand to touch upon, "you must bring her up
like christened folks's children, and take her to church, and let her
learn her catechise, as my little Aaron can say off--the "I believe",
and everything, and "hurt nobody by word or deed",--as well as if he
was the clerk.  That's what you must do, Master Marner, if you'd do the
right thing by the orphin child."

Marner's pale face flushed suddenly under a new anxiety.  His mind was
too busy trying to give some definite bearing to Dolly's words for him
to think of answering her.

"And it's my belief," she went on, "as the poor little creatur has
never been christened, and it's nothing but right as the parson should
be spoke to; and if you was noways unwilling, I'd talk to Mr. Macey
about it this very day.  For if the child ever went anyways wrong, and
you hadn't done your part by it, Master Marner--'noculation, and
everything to save it from harm--it 'ud be a thorn i' your bed for ever
o' this side the grave; and I can't think as it 'ud be easy lying down
for anybody when they'd got to another world, if they hadn't done their
part by the helpless children as come wi'out their own asking."

Dolly herself was disposed to be silent for some time now, for she had
spoken from the depths of her own simple belief, and was much concerned
to know whether her words would produce the desired effect on Silas.
He was puzzled and anxious, for Dolly's word "christened" conveyed no
distinct meaning to him.  He had only heard of baptism, and had only
seen the baptism of grown-up men and women.

"What is it as you mean by "christened"?"  he said at last, timidly.
"Won't folks be good to her without it?"

"Dear, dear!  Master Marner," said Dolly, with gentle distress and
compassion.  "Had you never no father nor mother as taught you to say
your prayers, and as there's good words and good things to keep us from
harm?"

"Yes," said Silas, in a low voice; "I know a deal about that--used to,
used to.  But your ways are different: my country was a good way off."
He paused a few moments, and then added, more decidedly, "But I want to
do everything as can be done for the child.  And whatever's right for
it i' this country, and you think 'ull do it good, I'll act according,
if you'll tell me."

"Well, then, Master Marner," said Dolly, inwardly rejoiced, "I'll ask
Mr. Macey to speak to the parson about it; and you must fix on a name
for it, because it must have a name giv' it when it's christened."

"My mother's name was Hephzibah," said Silas, "and my little sister was
named after her."

"Eh, that's a hard name," said Dolly.  "I partly think it isn't a
christened name."

"It's a Bible name," said Silas, old ideas recurring.

"Then I've no call to speak again' it," said Dolly, rather startled by
Silas's knowledge on this head; "but you see I'm no scholard, and I'm
slow at catching the words.  My husband says I'm allays like as if I
was putting the haft for the handle--that's what he says--for he's very
sharp, God help him.  But it was awk'ard calling your little sister by
such a hard name, when you'd got nothing big to say, like--wasn't it,
Master Marner?"

"We called her Eppie," said Silas.

"Well, if it was noways wrong to shorten the name, it 'ud be a deal
handier.  And so I'll go now, Master Marner, and I'll speak about the
christening afore dark; and I wish you the best o' luck, and it's my
belief as it'll come to you, if you do what's right by the orphin
child;--and there's the 'noculation to be seen to; and as to washing
its bits o' things, you need look to nobody but me, for I can do 'em
wi' one hand when I've got my suds about.  Eh, the blessed angil!
You'll let me bring my Aaron one o' these days, and he'll show her his
little cart as his father's made for him, and the black-and-white pup
as he's got a-rearing."

Baby _was_ christened, the rector deciding that a double baptism was
the lesser risk to incur; and on this occasion Silas, making himself as
clean and tidy as he could, appeared for the first time within the
church, and shared in the observances held sacred by his neighbours.
He was quite unable, by means of anything he heard or saw, to identify
the Raveloe religion with his old faith; if he could at any time in his
previous life have done so, it must have been by the aid of a strong
feeling ready to vibrate with sympathy, rather than by a comparison of
phrases and ideas: and now for long years that feeling had been
dormant.  He had no distinct idea about the baptism and the
church-going, except that Dolly had said it was for the good of the
child; and in this way, as the weeks grew to months, the child created
fresh and fresh links between his life and the lives from which he had
hitherto shrunk continually into narrower isolation.  Unlike the gold
which needed nothing, and must be worshipped in close-locked
solitude--which was hidden away from the daylight, was deaf to the song
of birds, and started to no human tones--Eppie was a creature of
endless claims and ever-growing desires, seeking and loving sunshine,
and living sounds, and living movements; making trial of everything,
with trust in new joy, and stirring the human kindness in all eyes that
looked on her.  The gold had kept his thoughts in an ever-repeated
circle, leading to nothing beyond itself; but Eppie was an object
compacted of changes and hopes that forced his thoughts onward, and
carried them far away from their old eager pacing towards the same
blank limit--carried them away to the new things that would come with
the coming years, when Eppie would have learned to understand how her
father Silas cared for her; and made him look for images of that time
in the ties and charities that bound together the families of his
neighbours. The gold had asked that he should sit weaving longer and
longer, deafened and blinded more and more to all things except the
monotony of his loom and the repetition of his web; but Eppie called
him away from his weaving, and made him think all its pauses a holiday,
reawakening his senses with her fresh life, even to the old
winter-flies that came crawling forth in the early spring sunshine, and
warming him into joy because _she_ had joy.

And when the sunshine grew strong and lasting, so that the buttercups
were thick in the meadows, Silas might be seen in the sunny midday, or
in the late afternoon when the shadows were lengthening under the
hedgerows, strolling out with uncovered head to carry Eppie beyond the
Stone-pits to where the flowers grew, till they reached some favourite
bank where he could sit down, while Eppie toddled to pluck the flowers,
and make remarks to the winged things that murmured happily above the
bright petals, calling "Dad-dad's" attention continually by bringing
him the flowers. Then she would turn her ear to some sudden bird-note,
and Silas learned to please her by making signs of hushed stillness,
that they might listen for the note to come again: so that when it
came, she set up her small back and laughed with gurgling triumph.
Sitting on the banks in this way, Silas began to look for the once
familiar herbs again; and as the leaves, with their unchanged outline
and markings, lay on his palm, there was a sense of crowding
remembrances from which he turned away timidly, taking refuge in
Eppie's little world, that lay lightly on his enfeebled spirit.

As the child's mind was growing into knowledge, his mind was growing
into memory: as her life unfolded, his soul, long stupefied in a cold
narrow prison, was unfolding too, and trembling gradually into full
consciousness.

It was an influence which must gather force with every new year: the
tones that stirred Silas's heart grew articulate, and called for more
distinct answers; shapes and sounds grew clearer for Eppie's eyes and
ears, and there was more that "Dad-dad" was imperatively required to
notice and account for.  Also, by the time Eppie was three years old,
she developed a fine capacity for mischief, and for devising ingenious
ways of being troublesome, which found much exercise, not only for
Silas's patience, but for his watchfulness and penetration.  Sorely was
poor Silas puzzled on such occasions by the incompatible demands of
love.  Dolly Winthrop told him that punishment was good for Eppie, and
that, as for rearing a child without making it tingle a little in soft
and safe places now and then, it was not to be done.

"To be sure, there's another thing you might do, Master Marner," added
Dolly, meditatively: "you might shut her up once i' the coal-hole.
That was what I did wi' Aaron; for I was that silly wi' the youngest
lad, as I could never bear to smack him.  Not as I could find i' my
heart to let him stay i' the coal-hole more nor a minute, but it was
enough to colly him all over, so as he must be new washed and dressed,
and it was as good as a rod to him--that was.  But I put it upo' your
conscience, Master Marner, as there's one of 'em you must
choose--ayther smacking or the coal-hole--else she'll get so masterful,
there'll be no holding her."

Silas was impressed with the melancholy truth of this last remark; but
his force of mind failed before the only two penal methods open to him,
not only because it was painful to him to hurt Eppie, but because he
trembled at a moment's contention with her, lest she should love him
the less for it.  Let even an affectionate Goliath get himself tied to
a small tender thing, dreading to hurt it by pulling, and dreading
still more to snap the cord, and which of the two, pray, will be
master?  It was clear that Eppie, with her short toddling steps, must
lead father Silas a pretty dance on any fine morning when circumstances
favoured mischief.

For example.  He had wisely chosen a broad strip of linen as a means of
fastening her to his loom when he was busy: it made a broad belt round
her waist, and was long enough to allow of her reaching the truckle-bed
and sitting down on it, but not long enough for her to attempt any
dangerous climbing.  One bright summer's morning Silas had been more
engrossed than usual in "setting up" a new piece of work, an occasion
on which his scissors were in requisition.  These scissors, owing to an
especial warning of Dolly's, had been kept carefully out of Eppie's
reach; but the click of them had had a peculiar attraction for her ear,
and watching the results of that click, she had derived the philosophic
lesson that the same cause would produce the same effect.  Silas had
seated himself in his loom, and the noise of weaving had begun; but he
had left his scissors on a ledge which Eppie's arm was long enough to
reach; and now, like a small mouse, watching her opportunity, she stole
quietly from her corner, secured the scissors, and toddled to the bed
again, setting up her back as a mode of concealing the fact.  She had a
distinct intention as to the use of the scissors; and having cut the
linen strip in a jagged but effectual manner, in two moments she had
run out at the open door where the sunshine was inviting her, while
poor Silas believed her to be a better child than usual.  It was not
until he happened to need his scissors that the terrible fact burst
upon him: Eppie had run out by herself--had perhaps fallen into the
Stone-pit.  Silas, shaken by the worst fear that could have befallen
him, rushed out, calling "Eppie!"  and ran eagerly about the unenclosed
space, exploring the dry cavities into which she might have fallen, and
then gazing with questioning dread at the smooth red surface of the
water.  The cold drops stood on his brow. How long had she been out?
There was one hope--that she had crept through the stile and got into
the fields, where he habitually took her to stroll.  But the grass was
high in the meadow, and there was no descrying her, if she were there,
except by a close search that would be a trespass on Mr. Osgood's crop.
Still, that misdemeanour must be committed; and poor Silas, after
peering all round the hedgerows, traversed the grass, beginning with
perturbed vision to see Eppie behind every group of red sorrel, and to
see her moving always farther off as he approached.  The meadow was
searched in vain; and he got over the stile into the next field,
looking with dying hope towards a small pond which was now reduced to
its summer shallowness, so as to leave a wide margin of good adhesive
mud. Here, however, sat Eppie, discoursing cheerfully to her own small
boot, which she was using as a bucket to convey the water into a deep
hoof-mark, while her little naked foot was planted comfortably on a
cushion of olive-green mud.  A red-headed calf was observing her with
alarmed doubt through the opposite hedge.

Here was clearly a case of aberration in a christened child which
demanded severe treatment; but Silas, overcome with convulsive joy at
finding his treasure again, could do nothing but snatch her up, and
cover her with half-sobbing kisses.  It was not until he had carried
her home, and had begun to think of the necessary washing, that he
recollected the need that he should punish Eppie, and "make her
remember".  The idea that she might run away again and come to harm,
gave him unusual resolution, and for the first time he determined to
try the coal-hole--a small closet near the hearth.

"Naughty, naughty Eppie," he suddenly began, holding her on his knee,
and pointing to her muddy feet and clothes--"naughty to cut with the
scissors and run away.  Eppie must go into the coal-hole for being
naughty.  Daddy must put her in the coal-hole."

He half-expected that this would be shock enough, and that Eppie would
begin to cry.  But instead of that, she began to shake herself on his
knee, as if the proposition opened a pleasing novelty. Seeing that he
must proceed to extremities, he put her into the coal-hole, and held
the door closed, with a trembling sense that he was using a strong
measure.  For a moment there was silence, but then came a little cry,
"Opy, opy!"  and Silas let her out again, saying, "Now Eppie 'ull never
be naughty again, else she must go in the coal-hole--a black naughty
place."

The weaving must stand still a long while this morning, for now Eppie
must be washed, and have clean clothes on; but it was to be hoped that
this punishment would have a lasting effect, and save time in
future--though, perhaps, it would have been better if Eppie had cried
more.

In half an hour she was clean again, and Silas having turned his back
to see what he could do with the linen band, threw it down again, with
the reflection that Eppie would be good without fastening for the rest
of the morning.  He turned round again, and was going to place her in
her little chair near the loom, when she peeped out at him with black
face and hands again, and said, "Eppie in de toal-hole!"

This total failure of the coal-hole discipline shook Silas's belief in
the efficacy of punishment.  "She'd take it all for fun," he observed
to Dolly, "if I didn't hurt her, and that I can't do, Mrs. Winthrop.
If she makes me a bit o' trouble, I can bear it. And she's got no
tricks but what she'll grow out of."

"Well, that's partly true, Master Marner," said Dolly, sympathetically;
"and if you can't bring your mind to frighten her off touching things,
you must do what you can to keep 'em out of her way.  That's what I do
wi' the pups as the lads are allays a-rearing.  They _will_ worry and
gnaw--worry and gnaw they will, if it was one's Sunday cap as hung
anywhere so as they could drag it.  They know no difference, God help
'em: it's the pushing o' the teeth as sets 'em on, that's what it is."

So Eppie was reared without punishment, the burden of her misdeeds
being borne vicariously by father Silas.  The stone hut was made a soft
nest for her, lined with downy patience: and also in the world that lay
beyond the stone hut she knew nothing of frowns and denials.

Notwithstanding the difficulty of carrying her and his yarn or linen at
the same time, Silas took her with him in most of his journeys to the
farmhouses, unwilling to leave her behind at Dolly Winthrop's, who was
always ready to take care of her; and little curly-headed Eppie, the
weaver's child, became an object of interest at several outlying
homesteads, as well as in the village.  Hitherto he had been treated
very much as if he had been a useful gnome or brownie--a queer and
unaccountable creature, who must necessarily be looked at with
wondering curiosity and repulsion, and with whom one would be glad to
make all greetings and bargains as brief as possible, but who must be
dealt with in a propitiatory way, and occasionally have a present of
pork or garden stuff to carry home with him, seeing that without him
there was no getting the yarn woven.  But now Silas met with open
smiling faces and cheerful questioning, as a person whose satisfactions
and difficulties could be understood.  Everywhere he must sit a little
and talk about the child, and words of interest were always ready for
him: "Ah, Master Marner, you'll be lucky if she takes the measles soon
