
CHAPTER I

THE FOLD AND THE SHEPHERD


'So to-morrow, Alice,' said Dr. Madden, as he walked with his eldest
daughter on the coast-downs by Clevedon, 'I shall take steps for
insuring my life for a thousand pounds.'

It was the outcome of a long and intimate conversation. Alice Madden,
aged nineteen, a plain, shy, gentle-mannered girl, short of stature,
and in movement something less than graceful, wore a pleased look as
she glanced at her father's face and then turned her eyes across the
blue channel to the Welsh hills. She was flattered by the confidence
reposed in her, for Dr. Madden, reticent by nature, had never been
known to speak in the domestic circle about his pecuniary affairs. He
seemed to be the kind of man who would inspire his children with
affection: grave but benign, amiably diffident, with a hint of lurking
mirthfulness about his eyes and lips. And to-day he was in the best of
humours; professional prospects, as he had just explained to Alice,
were more encouraging than hitherto; for twenty years he had practised
medicine at Clevedon, but with such trifling emolument that the needs
of his large family left him scarce a margin over expenditure; now, at
the age of forty-nine--it was 1872--he looked forward with a larger
hope. Might he not reasonably count on ten or fifteen more years of
activity? Clevedon was growing in repute as a seaside resort; new
houses were rising; assuredly his practice would continue to extend.

'I don't think girls ought to be troubled about this kind of thing,' he
added apologetically. 'Let men grapple with the world; for, as the old
hymn says, "'tis their nature to." I should grieve indeed if I thought
my girls would ever have to distress themselves about money matters.
But I find I have got into the habit, Alice, of talking to you very
much as I should talk with your dear mother if she were with us.'

Mrs. Madden, having given birth to six daughters, had fulfilled her
function in this wonderful world; for two years she had been resting in
the old churchyard that looks upon the Severn sea. Father and daughter
sighed as they recalled her memory. A sweet, calm, unpretending woman;
admirable in the domesticities; in speech and thought distinguished by
a native refinement, which in the most fastidious eyes would have
established her claim to the title of lady. She had known but little
repose, and secret anxieties told upon her countenance long before the
final collapse of health.

'And yet,' pursued the doctor--doctor only by courtesy--when he had
stooped to pluck and examine a flower, 'I made a point of never
discussing these matters with her. As no doubt you guess, life has been
rather an uphill journey with us. But the home must be guarded against
sordid cares to the last possible moment; nothing upsets me more than
the sight of those poor homes where wife and children are obliged to
talk from morning to night of how the sorry earnings shall be laid out.
No, no; women, old or young, should never have to think about money.

The magnificent summer sunshine, and the western breeze that tasted of
ocean, heightened his natural cheeriness. Dr. Madden fell into a
familiar strain of prescience.

'There will come a day, Alice, when neither man nor woman is troubled
with such sordid care. Not yet awhile; no, no; but the day will come.
Human beings are not destined to struggle for ever like beasts of prey.
Give them time; let civilization grow. You know what our poet says:
"There the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe--"'

He quoted the couplet with a subdued fervour which characterized the
man and explained his worldly lot. Elkanah Madden should never have
entered the medical profession; mere humanitarianism had prompted the
choice in his dreamy youth; he became an empiric, nothing more. 'Our
poet,' said the doctor; Clevedon was chiefly interesting to him for its
literary associations. Tennyson he worshipped; he never passed
Coleridge's cottage without bowing in spirit. From the contact of
coarse actualities his nature shrank.

When he and Alice returned from their walk it was the hour of family
tea. A guest was present this afternoon; the eight persons who sat down
to table were as many as the little parlour could comfortably contain.
Of the sisters, next in age to Alice came Virginia, a pretty but
delicate girl of seventeen. Gertrude, Martha, and Isabel, ranging from
fourteen to ten, had no physical charm but that of youthfulness; Isabel
surpassed her eldest sister in downright plainness of feature. The
youngest, Monica, was a bonny little maiden only just five years old,
dark and bright-eyed.

The parents had omitted no care in shepherding their fold. Partly at
home, and partly in local schools, the young ladies had received
instruction suitable to their breeding, and the elder ones were
disposed to better this education by private study. The atmosphere of
the house was intellectual; books, especially the poets, lay in every
room. But it never occurred to Dr. Madden that his daughters would do
well to study with a professional object. In hours of melancholy he had
of course dreaded the risks of life, and resolved, always with
postponement, to make some practical provision for his family; in
educating them as well as circumstances allowed, he conceived that he
was doing the next best thing to saving money, for, if a fatality
befell, teaching would always be their resource. The thought, however,
of his girls having to work for money was so utterly repulsive to him
that he could never seriously dwell upon it. A vague piety supported
his courage. Providence would not deal harshly with him and his dear
ones. He enjoyed excellent health; his practice decidedly improved. The
one duty clearly before him was to set an example of righteous life,
and to develop the girls' minds--in every proper direction. For, as to
training them for any path save those trodden by English ladies of the
familiar type, he could not have dreamt of any such thing. Dr. Madden's
hopes for the race were inseparable from a maintenance of morals and
conventions such as the average man assumes in his estimate of women.

The guest at table was a young girl named Rhoda Nunn. Tall, thin,
eager-looking, but with promise of bodily vigour, she was singled at a
glance as no member of the Madden family. Her immaturity (but fifteen,
she looked two years older) appeared in nervous restlessness, and in
her manner of speaking, childish at times in the hustling of
inconsequent thoughts, yet striving to imitate the talk of her seniors.
She had a good head, in both senses of the phrase; might or might not
develop a certain beauty, but would assuredly put forth the fruits of
intellect. Her mother, an invalid, was spending the summer months at
Clevedon, with Dr. Madden for medical adviser, and in this way the girl
became friendly with the Madden household. Its younger members she
treated rather condescendingly; childish things she had long ago put
away, and her sole pleasure was in intellectual talk. With a frankness
peculiar to her, indicative of pride, Miss Nunn let it be known that
she would have to earn her living, probably as a school teacher; study
for examinations occupied most of her day, and her hours of leisure
were frequently spent either at the Maddens or with a family named
Smithson--people, these latter, for whom she had a profound and
somewhat mysterious admiration. Mr. Smithson, a widower with a
consumptive daughter, was a harsh-featured, rough-voiced man of about
five-and-thirty, secretly much disliked by Dr. Madden because of his
aggressive radicalism; if women's observation could be trusted, Rhoda
Nunn had simply fallen in love with him, had made him, perhaps
unconsciously, the object of her earliest passion. Alice and Virginia
commented on the fact in their private colloquy with a shamefaced
amusement; they feared that it spoke ill for the young lady's breeding.
None the less they thought Rhoda a remarkable person, and listened to
her utterances respectfully.

'And what is your latest paradox, Miss Nunn?' inquired the doctor, with
grave facetiousness, when he had looked round the young faces at his
board.

'Really, I forget, doctor. Oh, but I wanted to ask you, Do you think
women ought to sit in Parliament?'

'Why, no,' was the response, as if after due consideration. 'If they
are there at all they ought to stand.'

'Oh, I can't get you to talk seriously,' rejoined Rhoda, with an air of
vexation, whilst the others were good-naturedly laughing. 'Mr. Smithson
thinks there ought to be female members of Parliament.

'Does he? Have the girls told you that there's a nightingale in Mr.
Williams's orchard?'

It was always thus. Dr. Madden did not care to discuss even playfully
the radical notions which Rhoda got from her objectionable friend. His
daughters would not have ventured to express an opinion on such topics
when he was present; apart with Miss Nunn, they betrayed a timid
interest in whatever proposition she advanced, but no gleam of
originality distinguished their arguments.

After tea the little company fell into groups--some out of doors
beneath the apple-trees, others near the piano at which Virginia was
playing Mendelssohn. Monica ran about among them with her five-year-old
prattle, ever watched by her father, who lounged in a canvas chair
against the sunny ivied wall, pipe in mouth. Dr. Madden was thinking
how happy they made him, these kind, gentle girls; how his love for
them seemed to ripen with every summer; what a delightful old age his
would be, when some were married and had children of their own, and the
others tended him--they whom he had tended. Virginia would probably be
sought in marriage; she had good looks, a graceful demeanour, a bright
understanding. Gertrude also, perhaps. And little Monica--ah, little
Monica! she would be the beauty of the family. When Monica had grown up
it would be time for him to retire from practice; by then he would
doubtless have saved money.

He must find more society for them; they had always been too much
alone, whence their shyness among strangers. If their mother had but
lived!

'Rhoda wishes you to read us something, father,' said his eldest girl,
who had approached whilst he was lost in dream.

He often read aloud to them from the poets; Coleridge and Tennyson by
preference. Little persuasion was needed. Alice brought the volume, and
he selected 'The Lotus-Eaters.' The girls grouped themselves about him,
delighted to listen. Many an hour of summer evening had they thus
spent, none more peaceful than the present. The reader's cadenced voice
blended with the song of a thrush.

'"Let us alone. Time driveth onward fast, And in a little while our
lips are dumb. Let us alone. What is it that will last? All thing' are
taken from us--"'

There came an interruption, hurried, peremptory. A farmer over at
Kingston Seymour had been seized with alarming illness; the doctor must
come at once.

'Very sorry, girls. Tell James to put the horse in, sharp as he can.

In ten minutes Dr. Madden was driving at full speed, alone in his
dog-cart, towards the scene of duty.

About seven o'clock Rhoda Nunn took leave, remarking with her usual
directness, that before going home she would walk along the sea-front
in the hope of a meeting with Mr. Smithson and his daughter. Mrs. Nunn
was not well enough to leave the house to-day; but, said Rhoda, the
invalid preferred being left alone at such times.

'Are you sure she prefers it?' Alice ventured to ask. The girl gave her
a look of surprise.

'Why should mother say what she doesn't mean?'

It was uttered with an ingenuousness which threw some light on Rhoda's
character.

By nine o'clock the younger trio of sisters had gone to bed; Alice,
Virginia, and Gertrude sat in the parlour, occupied with books, from
time to time exchanging a quiet remark. A tap at the door scarcely drew
their attention, for they supposed it was the maid-servant coming to
lay supper. But when the door opened there was a mysterious silence;
Alice looked up and saw the expected face, wearing, however, so strange
an expression that she rose with sudden fear.

'Can I speak to you, please, miss?'

The dialogue out in the passage was brief. A messenger had just arrived
with the tidings that Dr. Madden, driving back from Kingston Seymour,
had been thrown from his vehicle and lay insensible at a roadside
cottage.

* * *

For some time the doctor had been intending to buy a new horse; his
faithful old roadster was very weak in the knees. As in other matters,
so in this, postponement became fatality; the horse stumbled and fell,
and its driver was flung head forward into the road. Some hours later
they brought him to his home, and for a day or two there were hopes
that he might rally. But the sufferer's respite only permitted him to
dictate and sign a brief will; this duty performed, Dr. Madden closed
his lips for ever.




CHAPTER II

ADRIFT


Just before Christmas of 1887, a lady past her twenties, and with a
look of discouraged weariness on her thin face, knocked at a house-door
in a little street by Lavender Hill. A card in the window gave notice
that a bedroom was here to let. When the door opened, and a clean,
grave, elderly woman presented herself, the visitor, regarding her
anxiously, made known that she was in search of a lodging.

'It may be for a few weeks only, or it may be for a longer period,' she
said in a low, tired voice, with an accent of good breeding. 'I have a
difficulty in finding precisely what I want. One room would be
sufficient, and I ask for very little attendance.'

She had but one room to let, replied the other. It might be inspected.

They went upstairs. The room was at the back of the house, small, but
neatly furnished. Its appearance seemed to gratify the visitor, for she
smiled timidly.

'What rent should you ask?'

'That would depend, mum, on what attendance was required.'

'Yes--of course. I think--will you permit me to sit down? I am really
very tired. Thank you. I require very little attendance indeed. My ways
are very simple. I should make the bed myself, and--and, do the other
little things that are necessary from day to day. Perhaps I might ask
you to sweep the room out--once a week or so.'

The landlady grew meditative. Possibly she had had experience of
lodgers who were anxious to give as little trouble as possible. She
glanced furtively at the stranger.

'And what,' was her question at length, 'would you be thinking of
paying?'

'Perhaps I had better explain my position. For several years I have
been companion to a lady in Hampshire. Her death has thrown me on my
own resources--I hope only for a short time. I have come to London
because a younger sister of mine is employed here in a house of
business; she recommended me to seek for lodgings in this part; I might
as well be near her whilst I am endeavouring to find another post;
perhaps I may be fortunate enough to find one in London. Quietness and
economy are necessary to me. A house like yours would suit me very
well--very well indeed. Could we not agree upon terms within my--within
my power?'

Again the landlady pondered.

'Would you be willing to pay five and sixpence?'

'Yes, I would pay five and sixpence--if you are quite sure that you
could let me live in my own way with satisfaction to yourself. I--in
fact, I am a vegetarian, and as the meals I take are so very simple, I
feel that I might just as well prepare them myself. Would you object to
my doing so in this room? A kettle and a saucepan are really
all--absolutely all--that I should need to use. As I shall be much at
home, it will be of course necessary for me to have a fire.'

In the course of half an hour an agreement had been devised which
seemed fairly satisfactory to both parties.

'I'm not one of the graspin' ones,' remarked the landlady. 'I think I
may say that of myself. If I make five or six shillings a week out of
my spare room, I don't grumble. But the party as takes it must do their
duty on _their_ side. You haven't told me your name yet, mum.'

'Miss Madden. My luggage is at the railway station; it shall be brought
here this evening. And, as I am quite unknown to you, I shall be glad
to pay my rent in advance.'

'Well, I don't ask for that; but it's just as you like.'

'Then I will pay you five and sixpence at once. Be so kind as to let me
have a receipt.'

So Miss Madden established herself at Lavender Hill, and dwelt there
alone for three months.

She received letters frequently, but only one person called upon her.
This was her sister Monica, now serving at a draper's in Walworth Road.
The young lady came every Sunday, and in bad weather spent the whole
day up in the little bedroom. Lodger and landlady were on remarkably
good terms; the one paid her dues with exactness, and the other did
many a little kindness not bargained for in the original contract.

Time went on to the spring of '88. Then, one afternoon, Miss Madden
descended to the kitchen and tapped in her usual timid way at the door.

'Are you at leisure, Mrs. Conisbee? Could I have a little conversation
with you?'

The landlady was alone, and with no more engrossing occupation than the
ironing of some linen she had recently washed.

'I have mentioned my elder sister now and then. I am sorry to say she
is leaving her post with the family at Hereford. The children are going
to school, so that her services are no longer needed.'

'Indeed, mum?'

'Yes. For a shorter or longer time she will be in need of a home. Now
it has occurred to me, Mrs. Conisbee, that--that I would ask you
whether you would have any objection to her sharing my room with me? Of
course there must be an extra payment. The room is small for two
persons, but then the arrangement would only be temporary. My sister is
a good and experienced teacher, and I am sure she will have no
difficulty in obtaining another engagement.'

Mrs. Conisbee reflected, but without a shade of discontent. By this
time she knew that her lodger was thoroughly to be trusted.

'Well, it's if _you_ can manage, mum,' she replied. 'I don't see as I
could have any fault to find, if you thought you could both live in
that little room. And as for the rent, _I_ should be quite satisfied if
we said seven shillings instead of five and six.'

'Thank you, Mrs. Conisbee; thank you very much indeed. I will write to
my sister at once; the news will be a great relief to her. We shall
have quite an enjoyable little holiday together.'

A week later the eldest of the three Miss Maddens arrived. As it was
quite impossible to find space for her boxes in the bedroom, Mrs.
Conisbee allowed them to be deposited in the room occupied by her
daughter, which was on the same floor. In a day or two the sisters had
begun a life of orderly tenor. When weather permitted they were out
either in the morning or afternoon. Alice Madden was in London for the
first time; she desired to see the sights, but suffered the
restrictions of poverty and ill-health. After nightfall, neither she
nor Virginia ever left home.

There was not much personal likeness between them.

The elder (now five-and-thirty) tended to corpulence, the result of
sedentary life; she had round shoulders and very short legs. Her face
would not have been disagreeable but for its spoilt complexion; the
homely features, if health had but rounded and coloured them, would
have expressed pleasantly enough the gentleness and sincerity of her
character. Her cheeks were loose, puffy, and permanently of the hue
which is produced by cold; her forehead generally had a few pimples;
her shapeless chin lost itself in two or three fleshy fissures.
Scarcely less shy than in girlhood, she walked with a quick, ungainly
movement as if seeking to escape from some one, her head bent forward.

Virginia (about thirty-three) had also an unhealthy look, but the
poverty, or vitiation, of her blood manifested itself in less unsightly
forms. One saw that she had been comely, and from certain points of
view her countenance still had a grace, a sweetness, all the more
noticeable because of its threatened extinction. For she was rapidly
ageing; her lax lips grew laxer, with emphasis of a characteristic one
would rather not have perceived there; her eyes sank into deeper
hollows; wrinkles extended their network; the flesh of her neck wore
away. Her tall meagre body did not seem strong enough to hold itself
upright.

Alice had brown hair, but very little of it. Virginia's was inclined to
be ruddy; it surmounted her small head in coils and plaits not without
beauty. The voice of the elder sister had contracted an unpleasant
hoarseness, but she spoke with good enunciation; a slight stiffness and
pedantry of phrase came, no doubt, of her scholastic habits. Virginia
was much more natural in manner and fluent in speech, even as she moved
far more gracefully.

It was now sixteen years since the death of Dr. Madden of Clevedon. The
story of his daughters' lives in the interval may be told with brevity
suitable to so unexciting a narrative.

When the doctor's affairs were set in order, it was found that the
patrimony of his six girls amounted, as nearly as possible, to eight
hundred pounds.

Eight hundred pounds is, to be sure, a sum of money; but how, in these
circumstances, was it to be applied?

There came over from Cheltenham a bachelor uncle, aged about sixty.
This gentleman lived on an annuity of seventy pounds, which would
terminate when _he_ did. It might be reckoned to him for righteousness
that he spent the railway fare between Cheltenham and Clevedon to
attend his brother's funeral, and to speak a kind word to his nieces.
Influence he had none; initiative, very little. There was no reckoning
upon him for aid of any kind.

From Richmond in Yorkshire, in reply to a letter from Alice, wrote an
old, old aunt of the late Mrs. Madden, who had occasionally sent the
girls presents. Her communication was barely legible; it seemed to
contain fortifying texts of Scripture, but nothing in the way of
worldly counsel. This old lady had no possessions to bequeath. And, as
far as the girls knew, she was their mother's only surviving relative.

The executor of the will was a Clevedon tradesman, a kind and capable
friend of the family for many years, a man of parts and attainments
superior to his station. In council with certain other well-disposed
persons, who regarded the Maddens' circumstances with friendly anxiety,
Mr. Hungerford (testamentary instruction allowing him much freedom of
action) decided that the three elder girls must forthwith become
self-supporting, and that the three younger should live together in the
care of a lady of small means, who offered to house and keep them for
the bare outlay necessitated. A prudent investment of the eight hundred
pounds might, by this arrangement, feed, clothe, and in some sort
educate Martha, Isabel, and Monica. To see thus far ahead sufficed for
the present; fresh circumstances could be dealt with as they arose.

Alice obtained a situation as nursery-governess at sixteen pounds a
year. Virginia was fortunate enough to be accepted as companion by a
gentlewoman at Weston-super-Mare; her payment, twelve pounds. Gertrude,
fourteen years old, also went to Weston, where she was offered
employment in a fancy-goods shop--her payment nothing at all, but
lodging, board, and dress assured to her.

Ten years went by, and saw many changes.

Gertrude and Martha were dead; the former of consumption, the other
drowned by the overturning of a pleasure-boat. Mr. Hungerford also was
dead, and a new guardian administered the fund which was still a common
property of the four surviving daughters. Alice plied her domestic
teaching; Virginia remained a 'companion.' Isabel, now aged twenty,
taught in a Board School at Bridgewater, and Monica, just fifteen, was
on the point of being apprenticed to a draper at Weston, where Virginia
abode. To serve behind a counter would not have been Monica's choice if
any more liberal employment had seemed within her reach. She had no
aptitude whatever for giving instruction; indeed, had no aptitude for
anything but being a pretty, cheerful, engaging girl, much dependent on
the love and gentleness of those about her. In speech and bearing
Monica greatly resembled her mother; that is to say, she had native
elegance. Certainly it might be deemed a pity that such a girl could
not be introduced to one of the higher walks of life; but the time had
come when she must 'do something', and the people to whose guidance she
looked had but narrow experience of life. Alice and Virginia sighed
over the contrast with bygone hopes, but their own careers made it seem
probable that Monica would be better off 'in business' than in a more
strictly genteel position. And there was every likelihood that, at such
a place as Weston, with her sister for occasional chaperon, she would
ere long find herself relieved of the necessity of working for a
livelihood.

To the others, no wooer had yet presented himself. Alice, if she had
ever dreamt of marriage, must by now have resigned herself to spinsterhood.
Virginia could scarce hope that her faded prettiness, her
health damaged by attendance upon an exacting invalid and in profitless
study when she ought to have been sleeping, would attract any man in
search of a wife. Poor Isabel was so extremely plain. Monica, if her
promise were fulfilled, would be by far the best looking, as well as
the sprightliest, of the family. She must marry; of course she must
marry! Her sisters gladdened in the thought.

Isabel was soon worked into illness. Brain trouble came on, resulting
in melancholia. A charitable institution ultimately received her, and
there, at two-and-twenty, the poor hard-featured girl drowned herself
in a bath.

Their numbers had thus been reduced by half. Up to now, the income of
their eight hundred pounds had served, impartially, the ends now of
this, now of that one, doing a little good to all, saving them from
many an hour of bitterness which must else have been added to their
lot. By a new arrangement, the capital was at length made over to Alice
and Virginia jointly, the youngest sister having a claim upon them to
the extent of an annual nine pounds. A trifle, but it would buy her
clothing--and then Monica was sure to marry. Thank Heaven, she was sure
to marry!

Without notable event, matrimonial or other, time went on to this
present year of 1888.

Late in June, Monica would complete her twenty-first year; the elders,
full of affection for the sister, who so notably surpassed them in
beauty of person, talked much about her as the time approached,
devising how to procure her a little pleasure on her birthday. Virginia
thought a suitable present would be a copy of 'the Christian Year'.

'She has really no time for continuous reading. A verse of Keble--just
one verse at bedtime and in the morning might be strength to the poor
girl.'

Alice assented.

'We must join to buy it, dear,' she added, with anxious look. 'It
wouldn't be justifiable to spend more than two or three shillings.'

'I fear not.'

They were preparing their midday meal, the substantial repast of the
day. In a little saucepan on an oil cooking-stove was some plain rice,
bubbling as Alice stirred it. Virginia fetched from downstairs (Mrs.
Conisbee had assigned to them a shelf in her larder) bread, butter,
cheese, a pot of preserve, and arranged the table (three feet by one
and a half) at which they were accustomed to eat. The rice being ready,
it was turned out in two proportions; made savoury with a little
butter, pepper, and salt, it invited them to sit down.

As they had been out in the morning, the afternoon would be spent in
domestic occupations. The low cane-chair Virginia had appropriated to
her sister, because of the latter's headaches and backaches, and other
disorders; she herself sat on an ordinary chair of the bedside species,
to which by this time she had become used. Their sewing, when they did
any, was strictly indispensable; if nothing demanded the needle, both
preferred a book. Alice, who had never been a student in the proper
sense of the word, read for the twentieth time a few volumes in her
possession--poetry, popular history, and half a dozen novels such as
the average mother of children would have approved in the governess's
hands. With Virginia the case was somewhat different. Up to about her
twenty-fourth year she had pursued one subject with a zeal limited only
by her opportunities; study absolutely disinterested, seeing that she
had never supposed it would increase her value as a 'companion', or
enable her to take any better position. Her one intellectual desire was
to know as much as possible about ecclesiastical history. Not in a
spirit of fanaticism; she was devout, but in moderation, and never
spoke bitterly on religious topics. The growth of the Christian Church,
old sects and schisms, the Councils, affairs of Papal policy--these
things had a very genuine interest for her; circumstances favouring,
she might have become an erudite woman; But the conditions were so far
from favourable that all she succeeded in doing was to undermine her
health. Upon a sudden breakdown there followed mental lassitude, from
which she never recovered. It being subsequently her duty to read
novels aloud for the lady whom she 'companioned,' new novels at the
rate of a volume a day, she lost all power of giving her mind to
anything but the feebler fiction. Nowadays she procured such works from
a lending library, on a subscription of a shilling a month. Ashamed at
first to indulge this taste before Alice, she tried more solid
literature, but this either sent her to sleep or induced headache. The
feeble novels reappeared, and as Alice made no adverse comment, they
soon came and went with the old regularity.

This afternoon the sisters were disposed for conversation. The same
grave thought preoccupied both of them, and they soon made it their
subject.

'Surely,' Alice began by murmuring, half absently, 'I shall soon hear
of something.'

'I am dreadfully uneasy on my own account,' her sister replied.

'You think the person at Southend won't write again?'

'I'm afraid not. And she seemed so _very_ unsatisfactory. Positively
illiterate--oh, I couldn't bear that.' Virginia gave a shudder as she
spoke.

'I almost wish,' said Alice, 'that I had accepted the place at
Plymouth.'

'Oh, my dear! Five children and not a penny of salary. It was a
shameless proposal.'

'It was, indeed,' sighed the poor governess. 'But there is so little
choice for people like myself. Certificates, and even degrees, are
asked for on every hand. With nothing but references to past employers,
what can one expect? I know it will end in my taking a place without
salary.'

'People seem to have still less need of _me_,' lamented the companion.
'I wish now that I had gone to Norwich as lady-help.'

'Dear, your health would _never_ have supported it.'

'I don't know. Possibly the more active life might do me good. It
_might_, you know, Alice.'

The other admitted this possibility with a deep sigh.

'Let us review our position,' she then exclaimed.

It was a phrase frequently on her lips, and always made her more
cheerful. Virginia also seemed to welcome it as an encouragement.

'Mine,' said the companion, 'is almost as serious as it could be. I
have only one pound left, with the exception of the dividend.'

'I have rather more than four pounds still. Now, let us think,' Alice
paused. 'Supposing we neither of us obtain employment before the end of
this year. We have to live, in that case, more than six months--you on
seven pounds, and I on ten.'

'It's impossible,' said Virginia.

'Let us see. Put it in another form. We have both to live together on
seventeen pounds. That is--' she made a computation on a piece of
paper--'that is two pounds, sixteen shillings and eightpence a
month--let us suppose this month at an end. That represents fourteen
shillings and twopence a week. Yes, we can do it!'

She laid down her pencil with an air of triumph. Her dull eyes
brightened as though she had discovered a new source of income.

'We cannot, dear,' urged Virginia in a subdued voice. 'Seven shillings
rent; that leaves only seven and twopence a week for
everything--everything.'

'We _could_ do it, dear,' persisted the other. 'If it came to the very
worst, our food need not cost more than sixpence a day--three and
sixpence a week. I do really believe, Virgie, we could support life on
less--say, on fourpence. Yes, we could dear!'

They looked fixedly at each other, like people about to stake
everything on their courage.

'Is such a life worthy of the name?' asked Virginia in tones of awe.

'We shan't be driven to that. Oh, we certainly shall not. But it helps
one to know that, strictly speaking, we are _independent_ for another
six months.'

That word gave Virginia an obvious thrill.

'Independent! Oh, Alice, what a blessed thing is independence! Do you
know, my dear, I am afraid I have not exerted myself as I might have
done to find a new place. These comfortable lodgings, and the pleasure
of seeing Monica once a week, have tempted me into idleness. It isn't
really my wish to be idle; I know the harm it does me; but oh! if one
could work in a home of one's own!'

Alice had a startled, apprehensive look, as if her sister were touching
on a subject hardly proper for discussion, or at least dangerous.

'I'm afraid it's no use thinking of that, dear,' she answered awkwardly.

'No use; no use whatever. I am wrong to indulge in such thoughts.'

'Whatever happens, my dear,' said Alice presently, with all the
impressiveness of tone she could command, 'we must never entrench upon
our capital--never--never!'

'Oh, never! If we grow old and useless--'

'If no one will give us even board and lodging for our services--'

'If we haven't a friend to look to,' Alice threw in, as though they
were answering each other in a doleful litany, 'then indeed we shall be
glad that nothing tempted us to entrench on our capital! It would just
keep us'--her voice sank--'from the workhouse.'

After this each took up a volume, and until teatime they read quietly.

From six to nine in the evening they again talked and read alternately.
Their conversation was now retrospective; each revived memories of what
she had endured in one or the other house of bondage. Never had it been
their lot to serve 'really nice' people--this phrase of theirs was
anything but meaningless. They had lived with more or less well-to-do
families in the lower middle class--people who could not have inherited
refinement, and had not acquired any, neither proletarians nor
gentlefolk, consumed with a disease of vulgar pretentiousness, inflated
with the miasma of democracy. It would have been but a natural result
of such a life if the sisters had commented upon it in a spirit
somewhat akin to that of their employers; but they spoke without
rancour, without scandalmongering. They knew themselves superior to the
women who had grudgingly paid them, and often smiled at recollections
which would have moved the servile mind to venomous abuse.

At nine o'clock they took a cup of cocoa and a biscuit, and half an
hour later they went to bed. Lamp oil was costly; and indeed they felt
glad to say as early as possible that another day had gone by.

Their hour of rising was eight. Mrs. Conisbee provided hot water for
their breakfast. On descending to fetch it, Virginia found that the
postman had left a letter for her. The writing on the envelope seemed
to be a stranger's. She ran upstairs again in excitement.

'Who can this be from, Alice?'

The elder sister had one of her headaches this morning; she was clay
colour, and tottered in moving about. The close atmosphere of the
bedroom would alone have accounted for such a malady. But an unexpected
letter made her for the moment oblivious of suffering.

'Posted in London,' she said, examining the envelope eagerly.

'Some one you have been in correspondence with?'

'It's months since I wrote to any one in London.'

For full five minutes they debated the mystery, afraid of dashing their
hopes by breaking the envelope. At length Virginia summoned courage.
Standing at a distance from the other, she took out the sheet of paper
with tremulous hand, and glanced fearfully at the signature.

'What _do_ you think? It's Miss Nunn!'

'Miss Nunn! Never! How could she have got the address?'

Again the difficulty was discussed whilst its ready solution lay
neglected.

'Do read it!' said Alice at length, her throbbing head, made worse by
the agitation, obliging her to sink down into the chair.

The letter ran thus:--

'DEAR Miss MADDEN,--This morning I chanced to meet with Mrs. Darby, who
was passing through London on her way home from the seaside. We had
only five minutes' talk (it was at a railway station), but she
mentioned that you were at present in London, and gave me your address.
After all these years, how glad I should be to see you! The struggle of
life has made me selfish; I have neglected my old friends. And yet I am
bound to add that some of _them_ have neglected _me_. Would you rather
that I came to your lodgings or you to mine? Which you like. I hear
that your elder sister is with you, and that Monica is also in London
somewhere. Do let us all see each other once more. Write as soon as you
can. My kindest regards to all of you.--Sincerely yours,

RHODA NUNN.'

'How like her,' exclaimed Virginia, when she had read this aloud, 'to
remember that perhaps we may not care to receive visitors! She was
always so thoughtful. And it is true that I _ought_ to have written to
her.'

'We shall go to her, of course?'

'Oh yes, as she gives us the choice. How delightful! I wonder what she
is doing? She writes cheerfully; I am sure she must be in a good
position. What is the address? Queen's Road, Chelsea. Oh, I'm so glad
it's not very far. We can walk there and back easily.'

For several years they had lost sight of Rhoda Nunn. She left Clevedon
shortly after the Maddens were scattered, and they heard she had become
a teacher. About the date of Monica's apprenticeship at Weston, Miss
Nunn had a chance meeting with Virginia and the younger girl; she was
still teaching, but spoke of her work with extreme discontent, and
hinted at vague projects. Whether she succeeded in releasing herself
the Maddens never heard.

It was a morning of doubtful fairness. Before going to bed last night
they had decided to walk out together this morning and purchase the
present for Monica's birthday, which was next Sunday. But Alice felt
too unwell to leave the house. Virginia should write a reply to Miss
Nunn's letter, and then go to the bookseller's alone.

She set forth at half-past nine. With extreme care she had preserved an
out-of-doors dress into the third summer; it did not look shabby. Her
mantle was in its second year only; the original fawn colour had gone
to an indeterminate grey. Her hat of brown straw was a possession for
ever; it underwent new trimming, at an outlay of a few pence, when that
became unavoidable. Yet Virginia could not have been judged anything
but a lady. She wore her garments as only a lady can (the position and
movement of the arms has much to do with this), and had the step never
to be acquired by a person of vulgar instincts.

A very long walk was before her. She wished to get as far as the Strand
bookshops, not only for the sake of choice, but because this region
pleased her and gave her a sense of holiday. Past Battersea Park, over
Chelsea Bridge, then the weary stretch to Victoria Station, and the
upward labour to Charing Cross. Five miles, at least, measured by
pavement. But Virginia walked quickly; at half-past eleven she was
within sight of her goal.

A presentable copy of Keble's work cost less than she had imagined.
This rejoiced her. But after leaving the shop she had a singular
expression on her face--something more than weariness, something less
than anxiety, something other than calculation. In front of Charing
Cross Station she stopped, looking vaguely about her. Perhaps she had
it in her mind to return home by omnibus, and was dreading the expense.
Yet of a sudden she turned and went up the approach to the railway.

At the entrance again she stopped. Her features were now working in the
strangest way, as though a difficulty of breathing had assailed her. In
her eyes was an eager yet frightened look; her lips stood apart.

Another quick movement, and she entered the station. She went straight
to the door of the refreshment room, and looked in through the glass.
Two or three people were standing inside. She drew back, a tremor
passing through her.

A lady came out. Then again Virginia approached the door. Two men only
were within, talking together. With a hurried, nervous movement, she
pushed the door open and went up to a part of the counter as far as
possible from the two customers. Bending forward, she said to the
barmaid in a voice just above a whisper,--

'Kindly give me a little brandy.'

Beads of perspiration were on her face, which had turned to a ghastly
pallor. The barmaid, concluding that she was ill, served her promptly
and with a sympathetic look.

Virginia added to the spirit twice its quantity of water, standing, as
she did so, half turned from the bar. Then she sipped hurriedly two or
three times, and at length took a draught. Colour flowed to her cheeks;
her eyes lost their frightened glare. Another draught finished the
stimulant. She hastily wiped her lips, and walked away with firm step.

In the meantime a threatening cloud had passed from the sun; warm rays
fell upon the street and its clamorous life. Virginia felt tired in
body, but a delightful animation, rarest of boons, gave her new
strength. She walked into Trafalgar Square and viewed it like a person
who stands there for the first time, smiling, interested. A quarter of
an hour passed whilst she merely enjoyed the air, the sunshine, and the
scene about her. Such a quarter of an hour--so calm, contented,
unconsciously hopeful--as she had not known since Alice's coming to
London.

She reached the house by half-past one, bringing in a paper bag
something which was to serve for dinner. Alice had a wretched
appearance; her head ached worse than ever.

'Virgie,' she moaned, 'we never took account of illness, you know.'

'Oh, we must keep that off,' replied the other, sitting down with a
look of exhaustion. She smiled, but no longer as in the sunlight of
Trafalgar Square.

'Yes, I must struggle against it. We will have dinner as soon as
possible. I feel faint.'

If both of them had avowed their faintness as often as they felt it,
the complaint would have been perpetual. But they generally made a
point of deceiving each other, and tried to delude themselves;
professing that no diet could be better for their particular needs than
this which poverty imposed.

'Ah! it's a good sign to be hungry,' exclaimed Virginia. 'You'll be
better this afternoon, dear.'

Alice turned over 'The Christian Year,' and endeavoured to console
herself out of it, whilst her sister prepared the meal.




CHAPTER III

AN INDEPENDENT WOMAN


Virginia's reply to Miss Nunn's letter brought another note next
morning--Saturday. It was to request a call from the sisters that same
afternoon.

Alice, unfortunately, would not be able to leave home. Her disorder had
become a feverish cold--caught, doubtless, between open window and door
whilst the bedroom was being aired for breakfast. She lay in bed, and
her sister administered remedies of the chemist's advising.

But she insisted on Virginia leaving her in the afternoon. Miss Nunn
might have something of importance to tell or to suggest. Mrs.
Conisbee, sympathetic in her crude way, would see that the invalid
wanted for nothing.

So, after a dinner of mashed potatoes and milk ('The Irish peasantry
live almost entirely on that,' croaked Alice, 'and they are physically
a fine race'), the younger sister started on her walk to Chelsea. Her
destination was a plain, low roomy old house in Queen's Road, over
against the hospital gardens. On asking for Miss Nunn, she was led to a
back room on the ground floor, and there waited for a few moments.
Several large bookcases, a well-equipped writing-table, and kindred
objects, indicated that the occupant of the house was studious; the
numerous bunches of cut flowers, which agreeably scented the air,
seemed to prove the student was a woman.

Miss Nunn entered. Younger only by a year or two than Virginia, she was
yet far from presenting any sorrowful image of a person on the way to
old-maidenhood. She had a clear though pale skin, a vigorous frame, a
brisk movement--all the signs of fairly good health. Whether or not she
could be called a comely woman might have furnished matter for male
discussion; the prevailing voice of her own sex would have denied her
charm of feature. At first view the countenance seemed masculine, its
expression somewhat aggressive--eyes shrewdly observant and lips
consciously impregnable. But the connoisseur delayed his verdict. It
was a face that invited, that compelled, study. Self-confidence,
intellectual keenness, a bright humour, frank courage, were traits
legible enough; and when the lips parted to show their warmth, their
fullness, when the eyelids drooped a little in meditation, one became
aware of a suggestiveness directed not solely to the intellect, of
something like an unfamiliar sexual type, remote indeed from the
voluptuous, but hinting a possibility of subtle feminine forces that
might be released by circumstance. She wore a black serge gown, with
white collar and cuffs; her thick hair rippled low upon each side of
the forehead, and behind was gathered into loose vertical coils; in
shadow the hue seemed black, but when illumined it was seen to be the
darkest, warmest brown.

Offering a strong, shapely hand, she looked at her visitor with a smile
which betrayed some mixture of pain in the hearty welcome.

'And how long have you been in London?'

It was the tone of a busy, practical person. Her voice had not much
softness of timbre, and perhaps on that account she kept it carefully
subdued.

'So long as that? How I wish I had known you were so near! I have been
in London myself about two years. And your sisters?'

Virginia explained Alice's absence, adding,--

'As for poor Monica, she has only Sunday free--except one evening a
month. She is at business till half-past nine, and on Saturday till
half-past eleven or twelve.'

'Oh, dear, dear, dear!' exclaimed the other rapidly, making a motion
with her hand as if to brush away something disagreeable. 'That will
never do. You must put a stop to that.'

'I am sure we ought to.'

Virginia's thin, timid voice and weak manner were thrown into painful
contrast by Miss Nunn's personality.

'Yes, yes; we will talk about it presently. Poor little Monica! But do
tell me about yourself and Miss Madden. It is so long since I heard
about you.'

'Indeed I ought to have written. I remember that at the end of our
correspondence I remained in your debt. But it was a troublesome and
depressing time with me. I had nothing but groans and moans to send.'

'You didn't stay long, I trust, with that trying Mrs. Carr?'

'Three years!' sighed Virginia.

'Oh, your patience!'

'I wished to leave again and again. But at the end she always begged me
not to desert her--that was how she put it. After all, I never had the
heart to go.'

'Very kind of you, but--those questions are so difficult to decide.
Self-sacrifice may be quite wrong, I'm afraid.'

'Do you think so?' asked Virginia anxiously.

'Yes, I am sure it is often wrong--all the more so because people
proclaim it a virtue without any reference to circumstances. Then how
did you get away at last?'

'The poor woman died. Then I had a place scarcely less disagreeable.
Now I have none at all; but I really must find one very soon.'

She laughed at this allusion to her poverty, and made nervous motions.

'Let me tell you what my own course has been,' said Miss Nunn, after a
short reflection. 'When my mother died, I determined to have done with
teaching--you know that. I disliked it too much, and partly, of course,
because I was incapable. Half my teaching was a sham--a pretence of
knowing what I neither knew nor cared to know. I had gone into it like
most girls, as a dreary matter of course.'

'Like poor Alice, I'm afraid.'

'Oh, it's a distressing subject. When my mother left me that little sum
of money I took a bold step. I went to Bristol to learn everything I
could that would help me out of school life. Shorthand, book-keeping,
commercial correspondence--I had lessons in them all, and worked
desperately for a year. It did me good; at the end of the year I was
vastly improved in health, and felt myself worth something in the
world. I got a place as cashier in a large shop. That soon tired me,
and by dint of advertising I found a place in an office at Bath. It was
a move towards London, and I couldn't rest till I had come the whole
way. My first engagement here was as shorthand writer to the secretary
of a company. But he soon wanted some one who could use a typewriter.
That was a suggestion. I went to learn typewriting, and the lady who
taught me asked me in the end to stay with her as an assistant. This is
her house, and here I live with her.'
