'But I promised to come if it was fine.'

'Yes. I feared something might prevent you. You are very kind to give
me your company.' He was looking at the tips of her little boots. 'I
can't say how I thank you.'

Much embarrassed, Monica could only gaze at one of the sculls, as it
rose and fell, the water dripping from it in bright beads.

'Last year,' he pursued, 'I went on the river two or three times, but
alone. This year I haven't been in a boat till to-day.'

'You prefer driving?'

'Oh, it's only chance. I do drive a good deal, however. I wish it were
possible to take you through the splendid country I saw a day or two
ago--down in Surrey. Perhaps some day you will let me. I live rather a
lonely life, as you see. I have a housekeeper; no relative lives with
me. My only relative in London is a sister-in-law, and we very seldom
meet.'

'But don't you employ yourself in any way?'

'I'm very idle. But that's partly because I have worked very hard and
hopelessly all my life--till a year and a half ago. I began to earn my
own living when I was fourteen, and now I am forty-four--to-day.'

'This is your birthday?' said Monica, with an odd look the other could
not understand.

'Yes--I only remembered it a few hours ago. Strange that such a treat
should have been provided for me. Yes, I am very idle. A year and a
half ago my only brother died. He had been very successful in life, and
he left me what I regard as a fortune, though it was only a small part
of what he had.'

The listener's heart throbbed. Without intending it, she pulled the
tiller so that the boat began to turn towards land.

'The left hand a little,' said Widdowson, smiling correctly. 'That's
right. Many days I don't leave home. I am fond of reading, and now I
make up for all the time lost in years gone by. Do you care for books?'

'I never read very much, and I feel very ignorant.'

'But that is only for want of opportunity, I'm sure.'

He glanced at the brown-paper parcel. Acting on an impulse which
perturbed her, Monica began to slip off the loosely-tied string, and to
unfold the paper.

'I thought it was a book!' exclaimed Widdowson merrily, when she had
revealed a part of her present.

'When you told me your name,' said Monica, 'I ought perhaps to have
told you mine. It's written here. My sisters gave me this to-day.'

She offered the little volume. He took it as though it were something
fragile, and--the sculls fixed under his elbows--turned to the fly-leaf.

'What? It is _your_ birthday?'

'Yes. I am twenty-one.'

'Will you let me shake hands with you?' His pressure of her fingers was
the lightest possible. 'Now that's rather a strange thing--isn't it?
Oh, I remember this book very well, though I haven't seen it or heard
of it for twenty years. My mother used to read it on Sundays. And it is
really your birthday? I am more than twice your age, Miss Madden.'

The last remark was uttered anxiously, mournfully. Then, as if to
reassure himself by exerting physical strength, he drove the boat along
with half a dozen vigorous strokes. Monica was rustling over the pages,
but without seeing them.

'I don't think,' said her companion presently, 'you are very well
contented with your life in that house of business.'

'No, I am not.'

'I have heard a good deal of the hardships of such a life. Will you
tell me something about yours?'

Readily she gave him a sketch of her existence from Sunday to Sunday,
but without indignation, and as if the subject had no great interest
for her.

'You must be very strong,' was Widdowson's comment.

'The lady I went to see this afternoon told me I looked ill.'

'Of course I can see the effects of overwork. My wonder is that you
endure it at all. Is that lady an old acquaintance?'

Monica answered with all necessary detail, and went on to mention the
proposal that had been made to her. The hearer reflected, and put
further questions. Unwilling to speak of the little capital she
possessed, Monica told him that her sisters might perhaps help her to
live whilst she was learning a new occupation. But Widdowson had become
abstracted; he ceased pulling, crossed his arms on the oars, and
watched other boats that were near. Two deep wrinkles, rippling in
their course, had formed across his forehead, and his eyes widened in a
gaze of complete abstraction at the farther shore.

'Yes,' fell from him at length, as though in continuation of something
he had been saying, 'I began to earn my bread when I was fourteen. My
father was an auctioneer at Brighton. A few years after his marriage he
had a bad illness, which left him completely deaf. His partnership with
another man was dissolved, and as things went worse and worse with him,
my mother started a lodging-house, which somehow supported us for a
long time. She was a sensible, good, and brave woman. I'm afraid my
father had a good many faults that made her life hard. He was of a
violent temper, and of course the deafness didn't improve it. Well, one
day a cab knocked him down in the King's Road, and from that injury,
though not until a year after, he died. There were only two children; I
was the elder. My mother couldn't keep me at school very long, so, at
fourteen, I was sent into the office of the man who had been my
father's partner, to serve him and learn the business. I did serve him
for years, and for next to no payment, but he taught me nothing more
than he could help. He was one of those heartless, utterly selfish men
that one meets too often in the business world. I ought never to have
been sent there, for my father had always an ill opinion of him; but he
pretended a friendly interest in me--just, I am convinced, to make the
use of me that he did.'

He was silent, and began rowing again.

'What happened them?' asked Monica.

'I mustn't make out that I was a faultless boy,' he continued, with the
smile that graved wrinkles about his eyes; 'quite the opposite. I had a
good deal of my father's temper; I often behaved very badly to my
mother; what I needed was some stern but conscientious man to look
after me and make me work. In my spare time I lay about on the shore,
or got into mischief with other boys. It needed my mother's death to
make a more sensible fellow of me, and by that time it was too late. I
mean I was too old to be trained into profitable business habits. Up to
nineteen I had been little more than an errand and office boy, and all
through the after years I never got a much better position.'

'I can't understand that,' remarked Monica thoughtfully.

'Why not?'

'You seem to--to be the kind of man that would make your way.'

'Do I?' The description pleased him; he laughed cheerfully. 'But I
never found what my way was to be. I have always hated office work, and
business of every kind; yet I could never see an opening in any other
direction. I have been all my life a clerk--like so many thousands of
other men. Nowadays, if I happen to be in the City when all the clerks
are coming away from business, I feel an inexpressible pity for them. I
feel I should like to find two or three of the hardest driven, and just
divide my superfluous income between. A clerk's life--a life of the
office without any hope of rising--that is a hideous fate!'

'But your brother got on well. Why didn't he help you?'

'We couldn't agree. We always quarrelled.'

'Are you really so ill-tempered?'

It was asked in Monica's most naive tone, with a serious air of
investigation which at first confused Widdowson, then made him laugh.

'Since I was a lad,' he replied, 'I have never quarrelled with any one
except my brother. I think it's only very unreasonable people that
irritate me. Some men have told me that I was far too easy-going, too
good-natured. Certainly I _desire_ to be good-natured. But I don't
easily make friends; as a rule I can't talk to strangers. I keep so
much to myself that those who know me only a little think me surly and
unsociable.'

'So your brother always refused to help you?'

'It wasn't easy for him to help me. He got into a stockbroker's, and
went on step by step until he had saved a little money; then he
speculated in all sorts of ways. He couldn't employ me himself--and if
he could have done so, we should never have got on together. It was
impossible for him to recommend me to any one except as a clerk. He was
a born money-maker. I'll give you an example of how he grew rich. In
consequence of some mortgage business he came into possession of a
field at Clapham. As late as 1875 this field brought him only a rent of
forty pounds; it was freehold property, and he refused many offers of
purchase. Well, in 1885, the year before he died, the ground-rents from
that field--now covered with houses--were seven hundred and ninety
pounds a year. That's how men get on who have capital and know how to
use it. If _I_ had had capital, it would never have yielded me more
than three or four per cent. I was doomed to work for other people who
were growing rich. It doesn't matter much now, except that so many
years of life have been lost.'

'Had your brother any children?'

'No children. All the same, it astonished me when I heard his will; I
had expected nothing. In one day--in one hour--I passed from slavery to
freedom, from poverty to more than comfort. We never _hated_ each
other; I don't want you to think that.'

'But--didn't it bring you friends as well as comfort?'

'Oh,' he laughed, 'I am not so rich as to have people pressing for my
acquaintance. I have only about six hundred a year.'

Monica drew in her breath silently, then gazed at the distance.

'No, I haven't made any new friends. The one or two men I care for are
not much better off than I used to be, and I always feel ashamed to ask
them to come and see me. Perhaps they think I shun them because of
their position, and I don't know how to justify myself. Life has always
been full of worrying problems for me. I can't take things in the
simple way that comes natural to other men.'

'Don't you think we ought to be turning back, Mr. Widdowson?'

'Yes, we will. I am sorry the time goes so quickly.'

When a few minutes had passed in silence, he asked,--

'Do you feel that I am no longer quite a stranger to you, Miss Madden?'

'Yes--you have told me so much.'

'It's very kind of you to listen so patiently. I wish I had more
interesting things to tell, but you see what a dull life mine has
been.' He paused, and let the boat waver on the stream for a moment.
'When I dared to speak to you last Sunday I had only the faintest hope
that you would grant me your acquaintance. You can't, I am sure, repent
of having done me that kindness--?'

'One never knows. I doubted whether I ought to talk with a stranger--'

'Rightly--quite rightly. It was my perseverance--you saw, I hope, that
I could never dream of giving you offence. The rule is necessary, but
you see there may be exceptional cases.' He was giving a lazy stroke
now and then, which, as the tide was still, just moved the boat
onwards. 'I saw something in your face that _compelled_ me to speak to
you. And now we may really be friends, I hope?'

'Yes--I can think of you as a friend, Mr. Widdowson.'

A large boat was passing with four or five young men and girls who sang
in good time and tune. Only a song of the music-hall or of the nigger
minstrels, but it sounded pleasantly with the plash of the oars. A fine
sunset had begun to glow upon the river; its warmth gave a tone to
Monica's thin cheeks.

'And you will let me see you again before long? Let me drive you to
Hampton Court next Sunday--or any other place you would choose.'

'Very likely I shall be invited to my friend's in Chelsea.'

'Do you seriously think of leaving the shop?'

'I don't know--I must have time to think about it--'

'Yes--yes. But if I write a line to you, say on Friday, would you let
me know whether you can come?'

'Please to let me refuse for next Sunday. The one after, perhaps--'

He bent his head, looked desperately grave, and drove the boat on
Monica was disturbed, but held to her resolution, which Widdowson
silently accepted. The rest of the way they exchanged only brief
sentences, about the beauty of the sky, the scenes on river or bank,
and other impersonal matters. After landing, they walked in silence
towards Chelsea Bridge.

'Now I must go quickly home,' said Monica.

'But how?'

'By train--from York Road to Walworth Road.'

Widdowson cast a curious glance at her. One would have imagined that he
found something to disapprove in this ready knowledge of London transit.

'I will go with you to the station, then.'

Without a word spoken, they walked the short distance to York Road.
Monica took her ticket, and offered a hand for good-bye.

'I may write to you,' said Widdowson, his face set in an expression of
anxiety, 'and make an appointment, if possible, for the Sunday after
next?'

'I shall be glad to come--if I can.'

'It will be a very long time to me.'

With a faint smile, Monica hurried away to the platform. In the train
she looked like one whose mind is occupied with grave trouble. Fatigue
had suddenly overcome her; she leaned back and closed her eyes.

At a street corner very near to Messrs. Scotcher's establishment she
was intercepted by a tall, showily-dressed, rather coarse-featured
girl, who seemed to have been loitering about. It was Miss Eade.

'I want to speak to you, Miss Madden. Where did you go with Mr.
Bullivant this morning?'

The voice could not have been more distinctive of a London shop-girl;
its tone signified irritation.

'With Mr. Bullivant? I went nowhere with him.'

'But I _saw_ you both get into the bus in Kennington Park Road.'

'Did you?' Monica returned coldly. 'I can't help it if Mr. Bullivant
happened to be going the same way.'

'Oh, very well! I thought you was to be trusted. It's nothing to me--'

'You behave very foolishly, Miss Eade,' exclaimed the other, whose
nerves at this moment would not allow her to use patience with the
jealous girl. 'I can only tell you that I have never thought again of
Mr. Bullivant since he left the bus somewhere in Clapham Road. I'm
tired of talking about such things.'

'Now, see here, don't be cross. Come and walk a bit and tell me--'

'I'm too tired. And there's nothing whatever to tell you.'

'Oh, well, if you're going to be narsty?'

Monica walked on, but the girl caught her up.

'Don't be so sharp with me, Miss Madden. I don't say as you wanted him
to go in the bus with you. But you might tell me what he had to say.'

'Nothing at all; except that he wished to know where I was going, which
was no business of his. I did what I could for you. I told him that if
he asked you to go up the river with him I felt sure you wouldn't
refuse.'

'Oh, you did!' Miss Eade threw up her head. 'I don't think it was a
very delicate thing to say.'

'You are very unreasonable. I myself don't think it was very delicate,
but haven't you worried me to say something of the kind?'

'No, that I'm sure I haven't! Worrited you, indeed!'

'Then please never to speak to me on the subject again. I'm tired of
it.'

'And what did _he_ say, when you'd said that?'

'I can't remember.'

'Oh, you _are_ narsty to-day! Really you are! If it had been the other
way about, I'd never have treated _you_ like this, that I wouldn't.'

'Good-night!'

They were close to the door by which Messrs. Scotcher's resident
employees entered at night. Monica had taken out her latchkey. But Miss
Eade could not endure the thought of being left in torturing ignorance.

'_Do_ tell me!' she whispered. 'I'll do anything for you I can. Don't
be unkind, Miss Madden!'

Monica turned back again.

'If I were you, I wouldn't be so silly. I can't do more than assure you
and promise you that I shall never listen to Mr. Bullivant.'

'But what did he say about _me_, dear?'

'Nothing.'

Miss Eade kept a mortified silence.

'You had much better not think of him at all. I would have more pride.
I wish I could make you see him as I do.'

'And you did really speak about me? Oh, I do wish you'd find some one
to go out with. Then perhaps--'

Monica stood still, hesitated, and at length said,--

'Well--I _have_ found some one.'

'You have?' The girl all but danced with joy. 'You really have?'

'Yes--so now don't trouble me any more.'

This time she was allowed to turn back and enter the house.

No one else had yet come in. Monica ate a mouthful of bread and cheese,
which was in readiness on the long table down in the basement, and at
once went to bed. But no welcome drowsiness fell upon her. At half-past
eleven, when two of the other five girls who slept in the room made
their appearance, she was still changing uneasily from side to side.
They lit the gas (it was not turned off till midnight, after which hour
the late arrivals had to use a candle of their own procuring), and
began a lively conversation on the events of the day. Afraid of being
obliged to talk, Monica feigned sleep.

At twelve, just as the gas went out, another pair came to repose. They
had been quarrelling, and were very gloomy. After a long and
acrimonious discussion in the dark as to which of them should find a
candle--it ended in one of the girls who was in bed impatiently
supplying a light--they began sullenly to throw off their garments.

'Is Miss Madden awake?' said one of them, looking in Monica's direction.

There was no reply.

'She's picked up some feller to-day,' continued the speaker, lowering
her voice, and glancing round at her companions with a grin. 'Or else
she's had him all along--I shouldn't wonder.'

Heads were put forward eagerly, and inquiries whispered.

'He's oldish, I should say. I caught sight of them just as they was
going off in a boat from Battersea Park, but I couldn't see his face
very well. He looked rather like Mr. Thomas.'

Mr. Thomas was a member of the drapery firm, a man of fifty, ugly and
austere. At this description the listeners giggled and uttered
exclamations.

'Was he a swell?' asked one.

'Shouldn't wonder if he was. You can trust Miss M. to keep her eyes
open. She's one of the sly and quiet 'uns.'

'Oh, is she?' murmured another enviously. 'She's just one of those as
gets made a fool of--that's _my_ opinion.'

The point was argued for some minutes. It led to talk about Miss Eade,
who was treated with frank contempt because of her ill-disguised
pursuit of a mere counter-man. These other damsels had, at present,
more exalted views, for they were all younger than Miss Eade.

Just before one o'clock, when silence had reigned for a quarter of an
hour, there entered with much bustle the last occupant of the bedroom.
She was a young woman with a morally unenviable reputation, though some
of her colleagues certainly envied her. Money came to her with
remarkable readiness whenever she had need of it. As usual, she began
to talk very loud, at first with innocent vulgarity; exciting a little
laughter, she became anecdotic and very scandalous. It took her a long
time to disrobe, and when the candle was out, she still had her richest
story to relate--of point so Rabelaisian that one or two voices made
themselves heard in serious protest. The gifted anecdotist replied with
a long laugh, then cried, 'Good-night, young ladies!' and sank
peacefully to slumber.

As for Monica, she saw the white dawn peep at the window, and closed
her tear-stained eyes only when the life of a new week had begun
noisily in Walworth Road.




CHAPTER VI

A CAMP OF THE RESERVE


In consequence of letters exchanged during the week, next Sunday
brought the three Miss Maddens to Queen's Road to lunch with Miss
Barfoot. Alice had recovered from her cold, but was still ailing, and
took rather a gloomy view of the situation she had lately reviewed with
such courage. Virginia maintained her enthusiastic faith in Miss Nunn,
and was prepared to reverence Miss Barfoot with hardly less fervour.
Both of them found it difficult to understand their young sister, who,
in her letters, had betrayed distaste for the change of career proposed
to her. They were received with the utmost kindness, and all greatly
enjoyed their afternoon, for not even Monica's prejudice against a
house, which in her own mind she had stigmatized as 'an old-maid
factory,' could resist the charm of the hostess.

Though Miss Barfoot had something less than a woman's average stature,
the note of her presence was personal dignity. She was handsome, and
her carriage occasionally betrayed a consciousness of the fact.
According to circumstances, she bore herself as the lady of
aristocratic tastes, as a genial woman of the world, or as a fervid
prophetess of female emancipation, and each character was supported
with a spontaneity, a good-natured confidence, which inspired liking
and respect. A brilliant complexion and eyes that sparkled with
habitual cheerfulness gave her the benefit of doubt when her age was in
question; her style of dress, gracefully ornate, would have led a
stranger to presume her a wedded lady of some distinction. Yet Mary
Barfoot had known many troubles, poverty among them. Her experiences
and struggles bore a close resemblance to those which Rhoda Nunn had
gone through, and the time of trial had lasted longer. Mental and moral
stamina would have assured her against such evils of celibacy as
appeared in the elder Maddens, but it was to a change of worldly
fortune that she owed this revival of youthful spirit and energy in
middle life.

'You and I must be friends,' she said to Monica, holding the girl's
soft little hand. 'We are both black but comely.'

The compliment to herself seemed the most natural thing in the world.
Monica blushed with pleasure, and could not help laughing.

It was all but decided that Monica should become a pupil at the school
in Great Portland Street. In a brief private conversation, Miss Barfoot
offered to lend her the money that might be needful.

'Nothing but a business transaction, Miss Madden. You can give me
security; you will repay me at your convenience. If, in the end, this
occupation doesn't please you, you will at all events have regained
health. It is clear to me that you mustn't go on in that dreadful place
you described to Miss Nunn.'

The visitors took their leave at about five o'clock.

'Poor things! Poor things!' sighed Miss Barfoot, when she was alone
with her friend. 'What can we possibly do for the older ones?'

'They are excellent creatures,' said Rhoda; 'kind, innocent women; but
useful for nothing except what they have done all their lives. The
eldest can't teach seriously, but she can keep young children out of
mischief and give them a nice way of speaking. Her health is breaking
down, you can see.'

'Poor woman! One of the saddest types.'

'Decidedly. Virginia isn't quite so depressng--but how childish!'

'They all strike me as childish. Monica is a dear little girl; it
seemed a great absurdity to talk to her about business. Of course she
must find a husband.'

'I suppose so.'

Rhoda's tone of slighting concession amused her companion.

'My dear, after all we don't desire the end of the race.'

'No, I suppose not,' Rhoda admitted with a laugh.

'A word of caution. Your zeal is eating you up. At this rate, you will
hinder our purpose. We have no mission to prevent girls from marrying
suitably--only to see that those who can't shall have a means of living
with some satisfaction.'

'What chance is there that this girl will marry suitably?'

'Oh, who knows? At all events, there will be more likelihood of it if
she comes into our sphere.'

'Really? Do you know any man that would dream of marrying her?'

'Perhaps not, at present.'

It was clear that Miss Barfoot stood in some danger of becoming
subordinate to her more vehement friend. Her little body, for all its
natural dignity, put her at a disadvantage in the presence of Rhoda,
who towered above her with rather imperious stateliness. Her suavity
was no match for Rhoda's vigorous abruptness. But the two were very
fond of each other, and by this time thought themselves able safely to
dispense with the forms at first imposed by their mutual relations.

'If she marry at all,' declared Miss Nunn, 'she will marry badly. The
family is branded. They belong to the class we know so well--with no
social position, and unable to win an individual one. I must find a
name for that ragged regiment.'

Miss Barfoot regarded her friend thoughtfully.

'Rhoda, what comfort have you for the poor in spirit?'

'None whatever, I'm afraid. My mission is not to them.'

After a pause, she added,--

'They have their religious faith, I suppose; and it's answerable for a
good deal.'

'It would be a terrible responsibility to rob them of it,' remarked the
elder woman gravely.

Rhoda made a gesture of impatience.

'It's a terrible responsibility to do anything at all. But I'm
glad'--she laughed scornfully--'that it's not my task to release them.'

Mary Barfoot mused, a compassionate shadow on her fine face.

'I don't think we can do without the spirit of that religion,' she said
at length--'the essential human spirit. These poor women--one ought to
be very tender with them. I don't like your "ragged regiment" phrase.
When I grow old and melancholy, I think I shall devote myself to poor
hopeless and purposeless women--try to warm their hearts a little
before they go hence.'

'Admirable!' murmured Rhoda, smiling. 'But in the meantime they cumber
us; we have to fight.'

She threw forward her arms, as though with spear and buckler. Miss
Barfoot was smiling at this Palladin attitude when a servant announced
two ladies--Mrs. Smallbrook and Miss Haven. They were aunt and niece;
the former a tall, ungainly, sharp-featured widow; the later a
sweet-faced, gentle, sensible-looking girl of five-and-twenty.

'I am so glad you are back again,' exclaimed the widow, as she shook
hands with Miss Barfoot, speaking in a hard, unsympathetic voice. 'I do
so want to ask your advice about an interesting girl who has applied to
me. I'm afraid her past won't bear looking into, but most certainly she
is a reformed character. Winifred is most favourably impressed with
her--'

Miss Haven, the Winifred in question, began to talk apart with Rhoda
Nunn.

'I do wish my aunt wouldn't exaggerate so,' she said in a subdued
voice, whilst Mrs. Smallbrook still talked loudly and urgently. 'I
never said that I was favourably impressed. The girl protests far too
much; she has played on aunt's weaknesses, I fear.'

'But who is she?'

'Oh, some one who lost her character long ago, and lives, I should say,
on charitable people. Just because I said that she must once have had a
very nice face, aunt misrepresents me in this way--it's too bad.'

'Is she an educated person?' Miss Barfoot was heard to ask.

'Not precisely well educated.'

'Of the lower classes, then?'

'I don't like that term, you know. Of the _poorer_ classes.'

'She never was a lady,' put in Miss Haven quietly but decidedly.

'Then I fear I can be of no use,' said the hostess, betraying some of
her secret satisfaction in being able thus to avoid Mrs. Smallbrook's
request. Winifred, a pupil at Great Portland Street, was much liked by
both her teachers; but the aunt, with her ceaseless philanthropy at
other people's expense, could only be considered a bore.

'But surely you don't limit your humanity, Miss Barfoot, by the
artificial divisions of society.'

'I think those divisions are anything but artificial,' replied the
hostess good-humouredly. 'In the uneducated classes I have no interest
whatever. You have heard me say so.

'Yes, but I cannot think--isn't that just a little narrow?'

'Perhaps so. I choose my sphere, that's all. Let those work for the
lower classes (I must call them lower, for they are, in every sense),
let those work for them who have a call to do so. I have none. I must
keep to my own class.'

'But surely, Miss Nunn,' cried the widow, turning to Rhoda, 'we work
for the abolition of all unjust privilege? To us, is not a woman a
woman?'

'I am obliged to agree with Miss Barfoot. I think that as soon as we
begin to meddle with uneducated people, all our schemes and views are
unsettled. We have to learn a new language, for one thing. But your
missionary enterprise is admirable.'

'For my part,' declared Mrs. Smallbrook, 'I aim at the solidarity of
woman. You, at all events, agree with me, Winifred?'

'I really don't think, aunt, that there can be any solidarity of ladies
with servant girls,' responded Miss Haven, encouraged by a look from
Rhoda.

'Then I grieve that your charity falls so far below the Christian
standard.'

Miss Barfoot firmly guided the conversation to a more hopeful subject.

Not many people visited this house. Every Wednesday evening, from
half-past eight to eleven, Miss Barfoot was at home to any of her
acquaintances, including her pupils, who chose to call upon her; but
this was in the nature of an association with recognized objects. Of
society in the common sense Miss Barfoot saw very little; she had no
time to sacrifice in the pursuit of idle ceremonies. By the successive
deaths of two relatives, a widowed sister and an uncle, she had come
into possession of a modest fortune; but no thought of a life such as
would have suggested itself to most women in her place ever tempted
her. Her studies had always been of a very positive nature; her
abilities were of a kind uncommon in women, or at all events very
rarely developed in one of her sex. She could have managed a large and
complicated business, could have filled a place on a board of
directors, have taken an active part in municipal government--nay,
perchance in national. And this turn of intellect consisted with many
traits of character so strongly feminine that people who knew her best
thought of her with as much tenderness as admiration. She did not seek
to become known as the leader of a 'movement,' yet her quiet work was
probably more effectual than the public career of women who
propagandize for female emancipation. Her aim was to draw from the
overstocked profession of teaching as many capable young women as she
could lay hands on, and to fit them for certain of the pursuits
nowadays thrown open to their sex. She held the conviction that
whatever man could do, woman could do equally well--those tasks only
excepted which demand great physical strength. At her instance, and
with help from her purse, two girls were preparing themselves to be
pharmaceutical chemists; two others had been aided by her to open a
bookseller's shop; and several who had clerkships in view received an
admirable training at her school in Great Portland Street.

Thither every weekday morning Miss Barfoot and Rhoda repaired; they
arrived at nine o'clock, and with an hour's interval work went on until
five.

Entering by the private door of a picture-cleaner's shop, they ascended
to the second story, where two rooms had been furnished like
comfortable offices; two smaller on the floor above served for
dressing-rooms. In one of the offices, typewriting and occasionally
other kinds of work that demanded intelligence were carried on by three
or four young women regularly employed. To superintend this department
was Miss Nunn's chief duty, together with business correspondence under
the principal's direction. In the second room Miss Barfoot instructed
her pupils, never more than three being with her at a time. A bookcase
full of works on the Woman Question and allied topics served as a
circulating library; volumes were lent without charge to the members of
this little society. Once a month Miss Barfoot or Miss Nunn, by turns,
gave a brief address on some set subject; the hour was four o'clock,
and about a dozen hearers generally assembled. Both worked very hard.
Miss Barfoot did not look upon her enterprise as a source of pecuniary
profit, but she had made the establishment more than self-supporting.
Her pupils increased in number, and the working department promised
occupation for a larger staff than was at present engaged. The young
women in general answered their friend's expectations, but of course
there were disappointing instances. One of these had caused Miss
Barfoot special distress. A young girl whom she had released from a
life of much hardship, and who, after a couple of months' trial, bade
fair to develop noteworthy ability, of a sudden disappeared. She was
without relatives in London, and Miss Barfoot's endeavours to find her
proved for several weeks very futile. Then came news of her; she was
living as the mistress of a married man. Every effort was made to bring
her back, but the girl resisted; presently she again passed out of
sight, and now more than a year had elapsed since Miss Barfoot's last
interview with her.

This Monday morning, among letters delivered at the house, was one from
the strayed girl. Miss Barfoot read it in private, and throughout the
day remained unusually grave. At five o'clock, when staff and pupils
had all departed, she sat for a while in meditation, then spoke to
Rhoda, who was glancing over a book by the window.

'Here's a letter I should like you to read.'

'Something that has been troubling you since morning, isn't it?'

'Yes.'

Rhoda took the sheet and quickly ran through its contents. Her face
hardened, and she threw down the letter with a smile of contempt.

'What do you advise?' asked the elder woman, closely observing her.

'An answer in two lines--with a cheque enclosed, if you see fit.'

'Does that really meet the case?'

'More than meets it, I should say.'

Miss Barfoot pondered.

'I am doubtful. That is a letter of despair, and I can't close my ears
to it.'

'You had an affection for the girl. Help her, by all means, if you feel
compelled to. But you would hardly dream of taking her back again?'

'That's the point. Why shouldn't I?'

'For one thing,' replied Rhoda, looking coldly down upon her friend,
'you will never do any good with her. For another, she isn't a suitable
companion for the girls she would meet here.'

'I can't be sure of either objection. She acted with deplorable
rashness, with infatuation, but I never discovered any sign of evil in
her. Did you?'

'Evil? Well, what does the word mean? I am not a Puritan, and I don't
judge her as the ordinary woman would. But I think she has put herself
altogether beyond our sympathy. She was twenty-two years old--no
child--and she acted with her eyes open. No deceit was practised with
her. She knew the man had a wife, and she was base enough to accept a
share of his attentions. Do you advocate polygamy? That is an
intelligible position, I admit. It is one way of meeting the social
difficulty. But not mine.'

'My dear Rhoda, don't enrage yourself.'

'I will try not to.'

'But I can't see the temptation to do so. Come and sit down, and talk
quietly. No, I have no fondness for polygamy. I find it very hard to
understand how she could act as she did. But a mistake, however
wretched, mustn't condemn a woman for life. That's the way of the
world, and decidedly it mustn't be ours.'

'On this point I practically agree with the world.'

'I see you do, and it astonishes me. You are going through curious
changes, in several respects. A year ago you didn't speak of her like
this.'

'Partly because I didn't know you well enough to speak my mind. Partly
yes, I have changed a good deal, no doubt. But I should never have
proposed to take her by the hand and let bygones be bygones. That is an
amiable impulse, but anti-social.'

'A favourite word on your lips just now, Rhoda. Why is it anti-social?'

'Because one of the supreme social needs of our day is the education of
women in self-respect and self-restraint. There are plenty of
people--men chiefly, but a few women also of a certain temperament--who
cry for a reckless individualism in these matters. They would tell you
that she behaved laudably, that she was _living out herself_--and
things of that kind. But I didn't think you shared such views.'

'I don't, altogether. "The education of women in self-respect." Very
well. Here is a poor woman whose self-respect has given way under
grievous temptation. Circumstances have taught her that she made a wild
mistake. The man gives her up, and bids her live as she can; she is
induced to beggary. Now, in that position a girl is tempted to sink
still further. The letter of two lines and an enclosed cheque would as
likely as not plunge her into depths from which she could never be
rescued. It would assure her that there was no hope. On the other hand,
we have it in our power to attempt that very education of which you
speak. She has brains, and doesn't belong to the vulgar. It seems to me
that you are moved by illogical impulses--and certainly anything but
kind ones.'

Rhoda only grew more stubborn.

'You say she yielded to a grievous temptation. What temptation? Will it
bear putting into words?'

'Oh yes, I think it will,' answered Miss Barfoot, with her gentlest
smile. 'She fell in love with the man.

'Fell in love!' Concentration of scorn was in this echo. 'Oh, for what
isn't that phrase responsible!'

'Rhoda, let me ask you a question on which I have never ventured. Do
you know what it is to be in love?'

Miss Nunn's strong features were moved as if by a suppressed laugh; the
colour of her cheeks grew very slightly warm.

'I am a normal human being,' she answered, with an impatient gesture.
'I understand perfectly well what the phrase signifies.'

'That is no answer, my dear. Have you ever been in love with any man?'

'Yes. When I was fifteen.'

'And not since,' rejoined the other, shaking her head and smiling. 'No,
not since?'

'Thank Heaven, no!'

'Then you are not very well able to judge this case. I, on the other
hand, can judge it with the very largest understanding. Don't smile so
witheringly, Rhoda. I shall neglect your advice for once.'

'You will bring this girl back, and continue teaching her as before?'

'We have no one here that knows her, and with prudence she need never
be talked about by those of our friends who did.'

'Oh, weak--weak--weak!'

'For once I must act independently.'

'Yes, and at a stroke change the whole character of your work. You
never proposed keeping a reformatory. Your aim is to help chosen girls,
who promise to be of some use in the world. This Miss Royston
represents the profitless average--no, she is below the average. Are
you so blind as to imagine that any good will ever come of such a
person? If you wish to save her from the streets, do so by all means.
But to put her among your chosen pupils is to threaten your whole
undertaking. Let it once become known--and it _would_ become
known--that a girl of that character came here, and your usefulness is
at an end. In a year's time you will have to choose between giving up
the school altogether and making it a refuge for outcasts.'

Miss Barfoot was silent. She tapped with her fingers on the table.

'Personal feeling is misleading you,' Rhoda pursued. 'Miss Royston had
a certain cleverness, I grant; but do you think I didn't know that she
would never become what you hoped? All her spare time was given to
novel-reading. If every novelist could be strangled and thrown into the
sea we should have some chance of reforming women. The girl's nature
was corrupted with sentimentality, like that of all but every woman who
is intelligent enough to read what is called the best fiction, but not
intelligent enough to understand its vice. Love--love--love; a
sickening sameness of vulgarity. What is more vulgar than the ideal of
novelists? They won't represent the actual world; it would be too dull
for their readers. In real life, how many men and women _fall in love_?
Not one in every ten thousand, I am convinced. Not one married pair in
ten thousand have felt for each other as two or three couples do in
every novel. There is the sexual instinct, of course, but that is quite
a different thing; the novelists daren't talk about that. The paltry
creatures daren't tell the one truth that would be profitable. The
result is that women imagine themselves noble and glorious when they
are most near the animals. This Miss Royston--when she rushed off to
perdition, ten to one she had in mind some idiot heroine of a book. Oh,
I tell you that you are losing sight of your first duty. There are
people enough to act the good Samaritan; _you_ have quite another task
in life. It is your work to train and encourage girls in a path as far
as possible from that of the husband-hunter. Let them marry later, if
they must; but at all events you will have cleared their views on the
subject of marriage, and put them in a position to judge the man who
offers himself. You will have taught them that marriage is an alliance
of intellects--not a means of support, or something more ignoble still.
But to do this with effect you must show yourself relentless to female
imbecility. If a girl gets to know that you have received back such a
person as Miss Royston she will be corrupted by your spirit of
charity--corrupted, at all events, for our purposes. The endeavour to
give women a new soul is so difficult that we can't be cumbered by
side-tasks, such as fishing foolish people out of the mud they have
walked into. Charity for human weakness is all very well in its place,
but it is precisely one of the virtues that you must _not_ teach. You
have to set an example of the sterner qualities--to discourage anything
that resembles sentimentalism. And think if you illustrate in your own
behaviour a sympathy for the very vice of character we are trying our
hardest to extirpate!'

'This is a terrible harangue,' said Miss Barfoot, when the passionate
voice had been silent for a few ticks of the clock. 'I quite enter into
your point of view, but I think you go beyond practical zeal. However,
I will help the girl in some other way, if possible.'

'I have offended you.'

'Impossible to take offence at such obvious sincerity.'

'But surely you grant the force of what I say?'

'We differ a good deal, Rhoda, on certain points which as a rule would
never come up to interfere with our working in harmony. You have come
to dislike the very thought of marriage--and everything of that kind. I
think it's a danger you ought to have avoided. True, we wish to prevent
girls from marrying just for the sake of being supported, and from
degrading themselves as poor Bella Royston has done; but surely between
ourselves we can admit that the vast majority of women would lead a
wasted life if they did not marry.'

'I maintain that the vast majority of women lead a vain and miserable
life because they _do_ marry.'

'Don't you blame the institution of marriage with what is chargeable to
human fate? A vain and miserable life is the lot of nearly all mortals.
Most women, whether they marry or not, will suffer and commit endless
follies.'

'Most women--as life is at present arranged for them. Things are
changing, and we try to have our part in hastening a new order.'

'Ah, we use words in a different sense. I speak of human nature, not of
the effect of institutions.'

'Now it is you who are unpractical. Those views lead only to pessimism
and paralysis of effort.'

Miss Barfoot rose.

'I give in to your objection against bringing the girl back to work
here. I will help her in other ways. It's quite true that she isn't to
be relied upon.'

'Impossible to trust her in any detail of life. The pity is that her
degradation can't be used as an object lesson for our other girls.'

'There again we differ. You are quite mistaken in your ideas of how the
mind is influenced. The misery of Bella Royston would not in the least
affect any other girl's way of thinking about the destiny of her sex.
We must avoid exaggeration. If our friends get to think of us as
fanatics, all our usefulness is over. The ideal we set up must be
human. Do you think now that we know one single girl who in her heart
believes it is better never to love and never to marry?'

'Perhaps not,' admitted Rhoda, more cheerful now that she had gained
her point. 'But we know several who will not dream of marrying unless
reason urges them as strongly as inclination.'

Miss Barfoot laughed.

'Pray, who ever distinguished in such a case between reason and
inclination?'

'You are most unusually sceptical to-day,' said Rhoda, with an
impatient laugh.

'No, my dear. We happen to be going to the root of things, that's all.
Perhaps it's as well to do so now and then. Oh, I admire you immensely,
Rhoda. You are the ideal adversary of those care-nothing and
believe-nothing women who keep the world back. But don't prepare for
yourself a woeful disillusion.'

'Take the case of Winifred Haven,' urged Miss Nunn. 'She is a
good-looking and charming girl, and some one or other will want to
marry her some day, no doubt.'
