there'd been anything--you understand?--I should have spotted it at
once.'

'I don't relish this kind of talk,' observed Widdowson acidly. 'In
plain English, you supposed I was going to marry some one about whom I
couldn't confess the truth.'

'Of course I did. Now come; tell me how you got to know her.'

The man moved uneasily, but in the end related the whole story. Mrs.
Luke kept nodding, with an amused air.

'Yes, yes; she managed it capitally. Clever little witch. Fetching eyes
she has.'

'If you sent for me to make insulting remarks--'

'Bosh! I'll come to the wedding gaily. But you're a silly fellow. Now,
why didn't you come and ask me to find you a wife? Why, I know two or
three girls of really good family who would have jumped, simply jumped,
at a man with your money. Pretty girls too. But you always were so
horribly unpractical. Don't you know, my dear boy, that there are heaps
of ladies, real ladies, waiting the first decent man who offers them
five or six hundred a year? Why haven't you used the opportunities that
you knew I could put in your way?'

Widdowson rose from his seat and stood stiffly.

'I see you don't understand me in the least. I am going to marry
because, for the first time in my life, I have met the woman whom I can
respect and love.'

'That's very nice and proper. But why shouldn't you respect and love a
girl who belongs to good society?'

'Miss Madden is a lady,' he replied indignantly.

'Oh--yes--to be sure,' hummed the other, letting her head roll back.
'Well, bring her here some day when we can lunch quietly together. I
see it's no use. You're not a sharp man, Edmund.'

'Do you seriously tell me,' asked Widdowson, with grave curiosity,
'that there are ladies in good society who would have married me just
because I have a few hundreds a year?'

'My dear boy, I would get together a round dozen in two or three days.
Girls who would make good, faithful wives, in mere gratitude to the man
who saved them from--horrors.'

'Excuse me if I say that I don't believe it.'

Mrs. Luke laughed merrily, and the conversation went on in this strain
for another ten minutes. At the end, Mrs. Luke made herself very
agreeable, praised Monica for her sweet face and gentle manners, and so
dismissed the solemn man with a renewed promise to countenance the
marriage by her gracious presence.

When Rhoda Nunn returned from her holiday it wanted but a week to
Monica's wedding, so speedily had everything been determined and
arranged. Miss Barfoot, having learnt from Virginia all that was to be
known concerning Mr. Widdowson, felt able to hope for the best; a grave
husband, of mature years, and with means more than sufficient, seemed,
to the eye of experience, no unsuitable match for a girl such as
Monica. This view of the situation caused Rhoda to smile with
contemptuous tolerance.

'And yet,' she remarked, 'I have heard you speak severely of such
marriages.'

'It isn't the ideal wedlock,' replied Miss Barfoot. 'But so much in
life is compromise. After all, she may regard him more affectionally
than we imagine.'

'No doubt she has weighed advantages. If the prospects you offered her
had proved more to her taste she would have dismissed this elderly
admirer. His fate has been decided during the last few weeks. It's
probable that the invitation to your Wednesday evenings gave her a hope
of meeting young men.'

'I see no harm if it did,' said Miss Barfoot, smiling. 'But Miss Vesper
would very soon undeceive her on that point.'

'I hardly thought of her as a girl likely to make chance friendships
with men in highways and by-ways.'

'No more did I; and that makes all the more content with what has come
about. She ran a terrible risk, poor child. You see, Rhoda, nature is
too strong for us.'

Rhoda threw her head back.

'And the delight of her sister! It is really pathetic. The mere fact
that Monica is to be married blinds the poor woman to every possibility
of misfortune.' In the course of the same conversation, Rhoda remarked
thoughtfully,--

'It strikes me that Mr. Widdowson must be of a confiding nature. I
don't think men in general, at all events those with money, care to
propose marriage to girls they encounter by the way.'

'I suppose he saw that the case was exceptional.'

'How was he to see that?'

'You are severe. Her shop training accounts for much. The elder sisters
could never have found a husband in this way. The revelation must have
shocked them at first.'

Rhoda dismissed the subject lightly, and henceforth showed only the
faintest interest in Monica's concerns.

Monica meanwhile rejoiced in her liberation from the work and
philosophic severities of Great Portland Street. She saw Widdowson
somewhere or other every day, and heard him discourse on the life that
was before them, herself for the most part keeping silence. Together
they called upon Mrs. Luke, and had luncheon with her. Monica was not
displeased with her reception, and began secretly to hope that more
than a glimpse of that gorgeous world might some day be vouchsafed to
her.

Apart from her future husband, Monica was in a sportive mood, with
occasional fits of exhilaration which seemed rather unnatural. She had
declared to Mildred her intention of inviting Miss Nunn to the wedding,
and her mind was evidently set on carrying out this joke, as she
regarded it. When the desire was intimated by letter, Rhoda replied
with a civil refusal: she would be altogether out of place at such a
ceremony, but hoped that Monica would accept her heartiest good wishes.
Virginia was then dispatched to Queen's Road, and appealed so movingly
that the prophetess at length yielded. On hearing this Monica danced
with delight, and her companion in Rutland Street could not help
sharing her merriment.

The ceremony was performed at a church at Herne Hill. By an odd
arrangement--like everything else in the story of this pair, a result
of social and personal embarrassments--Monica's belongings, including
her apparel for the day, were previously dispatched to the bridegroom's
house, whither, in company with Virginia, the bride went early in the
morning. It was one of the quietest of weddings, but all ordinary
formalities were complied with, Widdowson having no independent views
on the subject. Present were Virginia (to give away the bride), Miss
Vesper (who looked decidedly odd in a pretty dress given her by
Monica), Rhoda Nunn (who appeared to advantage in a costume of quite
unexpected appropriateness), Mrs. Widdowson (an imposing figure,
evidently feeling that she had got into strange society), and, as
friend of the bridegroom, one Mr. Newdick, a musty and nervous City
clerk. Depression was manifest on every countenance, not excepting
Widdowson's; the man had such a stern, gloomy look, and held himself
with so much awkwardness, that he might have been imagined to stand
here on compulsion. For an hour before going to the church, Monica
cried and seemed unutterably doleful; she had not slept for two nights;
her face was ghastly. Virginia's gladness gave way just before the
company assembled, and she too shed many tears.

There was a breakfast, more dismal fooling than even this species of
fooling is wont to be. Mr. Newdick, trembling and bloodless, proposed
Monica's health; Widdowson, stern and dark as ever, gloomily responded;
and then, _that_ was happily over. By one o'clock the gathering began
to disperse. Monica drew Rhoda Nunn aside.

'It was very kind of you to come,' she whispered, with half a sob. 'It
all seems very silly, and I'm sure you have wished yourself away a
hundred times. I am really, seriously, grateful to you.'

Rhoda put a hand on each side of the girl's face, and kissed her, but
without saying a word; and thereupon left the house. Mildred Vesper,
after changing her dress in the room used by Monica, as she had done on
arriving, went off by train to her duties in Great Portland Street.
Virginia alone remained to see the married couple start for their
honeymoon. They were going into Cornwall, and on the return journey
would manage to see Miss Madden at her Somerset retreat. For the
present, Virginia was to live on at Mrs. Conisbee's, but not in the old
way; henceforth she would have proper attendance, and modify her
vegetarian diet--at the express bidding of the doctor, as she explained
to her landlady.

Though that very evening Everard Barfoot made a call upon his friends
in Chelsea, the first since Rhoda's return from Cheddar, he heard
nothing of the event that marked the day. But Miss Nunn appeared to him
unlike herself; she was absent, had little to say, and looked, what he
had never yet known her, oppressed by low spirits. For some reason or
other Miss Barfoot left the room.

'You are thinking with regret of your old home,' Everard remarked,
taking a seat nearer to Miss Nunn.'

'No. Why should you fancy that?'

'Only because you seem rather sad.'

'One is sometimes.'

'I like to see you with that look. May I remind you that you promised
me some flowers from Cheddar?'

'Oh, so I did,' exclaimed the other in a tone of natural recollection.
'I have brought them, scientifically pressed between blotting-paper.
I'll fetch them.'

When she returned it was together with Miss Barfoot, and the
conversation became livelier.

A day or two after this Everard left town, and was away for three
weeks, part of the time in Ireland.

'I left London for a while,' he wrote from Killarney to his cousin,
'partly because I was afraid I had begun to bore you and Miss Nunn.
Don't you regret giving me permission to call upon you? The fact is, I
can't live without intelligent female society; talking with women, as I
talk with you two, is one of my chief enjoyments. I hope you won't get
tired of my visits; in fact, they are all but a necessity to me, as I
have discovered since coming away. But it was fair that you should have
a rest.'

'Don't be afraid,' Miss Barfoot replied to this part of his letter. 'We
are not at all weary of your conversation. The truth is, I like it much
better than in the old days. You seem to me to have a healthier mind,
and I am quite sure that the society of intelligent women (we affect no
foolish self-depreciation, Miss Nunn and I) is a good thing for you.
Come back to us as soon as you like; I shall welcome you.'

It happened that his return to England was almost simultaneous with the
arrival from Madeira of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Barfoot. Everard at once
went to see his brother, who for the present was staying at Torquay.
Ill-health dictated his choice of residence; Thomas was still suffering
from the results of his accident; his wife had left him at a hotel, and
was visiting relatives in different parts of England. The brothers
exhibited much affectionate feeling after their long separation; they
spent a week together, and planned for another meeting when Mrs. Thomas
should have returned to her husband.

An engagement called Everard back to town. He was to be present at the
wedding of his friend Micklethwaite, now actually on the point of
taking place. The mathematician had found a suitable house, very small
and of very low rental, out at South Tottenham, and thither was
transferred the furniture which had been in his bride's possession
since the death of her parents; Micklethwaite bought only a few new
things. By discreet inquiry, Barfoot had discovered that 'Fanny,'
though musically inclined, would not possess a piano, her old
instrument being quite worn out and not worth the cost of conveyance;
thus it came to pass that, a day or two before the wedding,
Micklethwaite was astonished by the arrival of an instrument of the
Cottage species, mysteriously addressed to a person not yet in
existence, Mrs. Micklethwaite.

'You scoundrel!' he cried, when, on the next day, Barfoot presented
himself at the house. 'This is _your_ doing. What the deuce do you
mean? A man who complains of poverty! Well, it's the greatest kindness
I ever received, that's all. Fanny will be devoted to you. With music
in the house, our blind sister will lead quite a different life.
Confound it! I want to begin crying. Why, man, I'm not accustomed to
receive presents, even as a proxy; I haven't had one since I was a
schoolboy.'

'That's an audacious statement. When you told me that Miss Wheatley
never allowed your birthday to pass without sending something.'

'Oh, Fanny! But I have never thought of Fanny as a separate person.
Upon my word, now I think of it, I never have. Fanny and I have been
one for ages.'

That evening the sisters arrived from their country home. Micklethwaite
gave up the house to them, and went to a lodging.

It was with no little curiosity that, on the appointed morning, Barfoot
repaired to South Tottenham. He had seen a photograph of Miss Wheatley,
but it dated from seventeen years ago. Standing in her presence, he was
moved with compassion, and with another feeling more rarely excited in
him by a women's face, that of reverential tenderness. Impossible to
recognize in this countenance the features known to him from the
portrait. At three-and-twenty she had possessed a sweet, simple
comeliness on which any man's eye would have rested with pleasure; at
forty she was wrinkled, hollow-cheeked, sallow, indelible weariness
stamped upon her brow and lips. She looked much older than Mary
Barfoot, though they were just of an age. And all this for want of a
little money. The life of a pure, gentle, tender-hearted woman worn
away in hopeless longing and in hard struggle for daily bread. As she
took his hand and thanked him with an exquisite modesty for the present
she had received, Everard felt a lump rise in his throat. He was
ashamed to notice that the years had dealt so unkindly with her; fixing
his look upon her eyes, he gladdened at the gladness which shone in
them, at the soft light which they could still shed forth.

Micklethwaite was probably unconscious of the poor woman's faded
appearance. He had seen her from time to time, and always with the love
which idealizes. In his own pathetic phrase, she was simply a part of
himself; he no more thought of criticizing her features than of
standing before the glass to mark and comment upon his own. It was
enough to glance at him as he took his place beside her, the proudest
and happiest of men. A miracle had been wrought for him; kind fate, in
giving her to his arms, had blotted out those long years of sorrow, and
to-day Fanny was the betrothed of his youth, beautiful in his sight as
when first he looked upon her.

Her sister, younger by five years, had more regular lineaments, but she
too was worn with suffering, and her sightless eyes made it more
distressing to contemplate her. She spoke cheerfully, however, and
laughed with joy in Fanny's happiness. Barfoot pressed both her hands
with the friendliest warmth.

One vehicle conveyed them all to the church, and in half an hour the
lady to whom the piano was addressed had come into being. The simplest
of transformations; no bridal gown, no veil, no wreath; only the gold
ring for symbol of union. And it might have happened nigh a score of
years ago; nigh a score of years lost from the span of human life--all
for want of a little money.

'I will say good-bye to you here,' muttered Everard to his friend at
the church door.

The married man gripped him by the arm.

'You will do nothing of the kind.--Fanny, he wants to be off at
once!--You won't go until you have heard my wife play something on that
blessed instrument.'

So all entered a cab again and drove back to the house. A servant who
had come with Fanny from the country, a girl of fifteen, opened the
door to them, smiling and curtseying. And all sat together in happy
talk, the blind woman gayest among them; she wished to have the
clergyman described to her, and the appearance of the church. Then Mrs.
Micklethwaite placed herself at the piano, and played simple,
old-fashioned music, neither well nor badly, but to the infinite
delight of two of her hearers.

'Mr. Barfoot,' said the sister at length, 'I have known your name for a
long time, but I little thought to meet you on such a day as this, and
to owe you such endless thanks. So long as I can have music I forget
that I can't see.

'Barfoot is the finest fellow on earth,' exclaimed Micklethwaite. 'At
least, he would be if he understood Trilinear Co-ordinates.'

'Are _you_ strong in mathematics, Mrs. Micklethwaite?' asked Everard.

'I? Oh dear, no! I never got much past the Rule of Three. But Tom has
forgiven me that long ago.'

'I don't despair of getting you into plane trigonometry, Fanny. We will
gossip about sines and co-sines before we die.'

It was said half-seriously, and Everard could not but burst into
laughter.

He sat down with them to their plain midday meal, and early in the
afternoon took his leave. He had no inclination to go home, if the
empty flat could be dignified with such a name. After reading the
papers at his club, he walked aimlessly about the streets until it was
time to return to the same place for dinner. Then he sat with a cigar,
dreaming, and at half-past eight went to the Royal Oak Station, and
journeyed to Chelsea.




CHAPTER XIII

DISCORD OF LEADERS


A disappointment awaited him. Miss Barfoot was not well enough to see
any one. Had she been suffering long? he inquired. No; it was only this
evening; she had not dined, and was gone to her room. Miss Nunn could
not receive him.

He went home, and wrote to his cousin.

The next morning he came upon a passage in the newspaper which seemed
to suggest a cause for Miss Barfoot's indisposition. It was the report
of an inquest. A girl named Bella Royston had poisoned herself. She was
living alone, without occupation, and received visits only from one
lady. This lady, her name Miss Barfoot, had been supplying her with
money, and had just found her a situation in a house of business; but
the girl appeared to have gone through troubles which had so disturbed
her mind that she could not make the effort required of her. She left a
few lines addressed to her benefactress, just saying that she chose
death rather than the struggle to recover her position.

It was Saturday. He decided to call in the afternoon and see whether
Mary had recovered.

Again a disappointment. Miss Barfoot was better, and had been away
since breakfast; Miss Nunn was also absent.

Everard sauntered about the neighbourhood, and presently found himself
in the gardens of Chelsea Hospital. It was a warm afternoon, and so
still that he heard the fall of yellow leaves as he walked hither and
thither along the alleys. His failure to obtain an interview with Miss
Nunn annoyed him; but for her presence in the house he would not have
got into this habit of going there. As far as ever from harbouring any
serious thoughts concerning Rhoda, he felt himself impelled along the
way which he had jokingly indicated in talk with Micklethwaite; he was
tempted to make love to her as an interesting pastime, to observe how
so strong-minded a woman would conduct herself under such
circumstances. Had she or not a vein of sentiment in her character? Was
it impossible to move her as other women are moved? Meditating thus, he
looked up and saw the subject of his thoughts. She was seated a few
yards away, and seemingly had not yet become aware of him, her eyes
were on the ground, and troubled reverie appeared in her countenance.

'I have just called at the house, Miss Nunn. How is my cousin to-day?'

She had looked up only a moment before he spoke, and seemed vexed at
being thus discovered.

'I believe Miss Barfoot is quite well,' she answered coldly, as they
shook hands.

'But yesterday she was not so.'

'A headache, or something of the kind.'

He was astonished. Rhoda spoke with a cold indifference. She has risen,
and showed her wish to move from the spot.

'She had to attend an inquest yesterday. Perhaps it rather upset her?'

'Yes, I think it did.'

Unable to adapt himself at once to this singular mood of Rhoda's, but
resolved not to let her go before he had tried to learn the cause of
it, he walked along by her side. In this part of the gardens there were
only a few nursemaids and children; it would have been a capital place
and time for improving his intimacy with the remarkable woman. But
possibly she was determined to be rid of him. A contest between his
will and hers would be an amusement decidedly to his taste.

'You also have been disturbed by it, Miss Nunn.'

'By the inquest?' she returned, with barely veiled scorn. 'Indeed I
have not.'

'Did you know that poor girl?'

'Some time ago.'

'Then it is only natural that her miserable fate should sadden you.'

He spoke as if with respectful sympathy, ignoring what she had said.

'It has no effect whatever upon me,' Rhoda answered, glancing at him
with surprise and displeasure.

'Forgive me if I say that I find it difficult to believe that. Perhaps
you--'

She interrupted him.

'I don't easily forgive anyone who charges me with falsehood, Mr.
Barfoot.'

'Oh, you take it too seriously. I beg your pardon a thousand times. I
was going to say that perhaps you won't allow yourself to acknowledge
any feeling of compassion in such a case.'

'I don't acknowledge what I don't feel. I will bid you good-afternoon.'

He smiled at her with all the softness and persuasiveness of which he
was capable. She had offered her hand with cold dignity, and instead of
taking it merely for good-bye he retained it.

'You must, you shall forgive me! I shall be too miserable if you
dismiss me in this way. I see that I was altogether wrong. You know all
the particulars of the case, and I have only read a brief newspaper
account. I am sure the girl didn't deserve your pity.'

She was trying to draw her hand away. Everard felt the strength of her
muscles, and the sensation was somehow so pleasant that he could not at
once release her.

'You do pardon me, Miss Nunn?'

'Please don't be foolish. I will thank you to let my hand go.'

Was it possible? Her cheek had coloured, ever so slightly. But with
indignation, no doubt, for her eyes flashed sternly at him. Very
unwillingly, Everard had no choice but to obey the command.

'Will you have the kindness to tell me,' he said more gravely, 'whether
my cousin was suffering only from that cause?'

'I can't say,' she added after a pause. 'I haven't spoken with Miss
Barfoot for two or three days.'

He looked at her with genuine astonishment.

'You haven't seen each other?'

'Miss Barfoot is angry with me. I think we shall be obliged to part.'

'To part? What can possibly have happened? Miss Barfoot angry with
_you_?'

'If I _must_ satisfy your curiosity, Mr. Barfoot, I had better tell you
at once that the subject of our difference is the girl you mentioned.
Not very long ago she tried to persuade your cousin to receive her
again--to give her lessons at the place in Great Portland Street, as
before she disgraced herself. Miss Barfoot, with too ready good-nature,
was willing to do this, but I resisted. It seemed to me that it would
be a very weak and wrong thing to do. At the time she ended by agreeing
with me. Now that the girl has killed herself, she throws the blame
upon my interference. We had a painful conversation, and I don't think
we can continue to live together.'

Barfoot listened with gratification. It was much to have compelled
Rhoda to explain herself, and on such a subject.

'Nor even to work together?' he asked.

'It is doubtful.'

Rhoda still moved forward, but very slowly, and without impatience.

'You will somehow get over this difficulty, I am sure. Such friends as
you and Mary don't quarrel like ordinary unreasonable women. Won't you
let me be of use?'

'How?' asked Rhoda with surprise.

'I shall make my cousin see that she is wrong.'

'How do you know that she is wrong?'

'Because I am convinced that _you_ must be right. I respect Mary's
judgment, but I respect yours still more.'

Rhoda raised her head and smiled.

'That compliment,' she said, 'pleases me less than the one you have
uttered without intending it.'

'You must explain.'

'You said that by making Miss Barfoot see she was wrong you could alter
her mind towards me. The world's opinion would hardly support you in
that, even in the case of men.'

Everard laughed.

'Now this is better. Now we are talking in the old way. Surely you know
that the world's opinion has no validity for me.'

She kept silence.

'But, after all, _is_ Mary wrong? I'm not afraid to ask the question
now that your face has cleared a little. How angry you were with me!
But surely I didn't deserve it. You would have been much more
forbearing if you had known what delight I felt when I saw you sitting
over there. It is nearly a month since we met, and I couldn't keep away
any longer.'

Rhoda swept the distance with indifferent eyes.

'Mary was fond of this girl?' he inquired, watching her.

'Yes, she was.'

'Then her distress, and even anger, are natural enough. We won't
discuss the girl's history; probably I know all that I need to. But
whatever her misdoing, you certainly didn't wish to drive her to
suicide.'

Rhoda deigned no reply.

'All the same,' he continued in his gentlest tone, 'it turns out that
you have practically done so. If Mary had taken the girl back that
despair would most likely never have come upon her. Isn't it natural
that Mary should repent of having been guided by you, and perhaps say
rather severe things?'

'Natural, no doubt. But it is just as natural for me to resent blame
where I have done nothing blameworthy.'

'You are absolutely sure that this is the case?'

'I thought you expressed a conviction that I was in the right?'

There was no smile, but Everard believed that he detected its
possibility on the closed lips.

'I have got into the way of always thinking so--in questions of this
kind. But perhaps you tend to err on the side of severity. Perhaps you
make too little allowance for human weakness.'

'Human weakness is a plea that has been much abused, and generally in
an interested spirit.'

This was something like a personal rebuke. Whether she so meant it,
Barfoot could not determine. He hoped she did, for the more personal
their talk became the better he would be pleased.

'I, for one,' he said, 'very seldom urge that plea, whether in my own
defence or another's. But it answers to a spirit we can't altogether
dispense with. Don't you feel ever so little regret that your severe
logic prevailed?'

'Not the slightest regret.'

Everard thought this answer magnificent. He had anticipated some
evasion. However inappropriately, he was constrained to smile.

'How I admire your consistency! We others are poor halting creatures in
comparison.'

'Mr. Barfoot,' said Rhoda suddenly, 'I have had enough of this. If your
approval is sincere, I don't ask for it. If you are practising your
powers of irony, I had rather you chose some other person. I will go my
way, if you please.'

She just bent her head, and left him.

Enough for the present. Having raised his hat and turned on his heels,
Barfoot strolled away in a mood of peculiar satisfaction. He laughed to
himself. She was certainly a fine creature--yes, physically as well.
Her out-of-door appearance on the whole pleased him; she could dress
very plainly without disguising the advantages of figure she possessed.
He pictured her rambling about the hills, and longed to be her
companion on such an expedition; there would be no consulting with
feebleness, as when one sets forth to walk with the everyday woman.
What daring topics might come up in the course of a twenty-mile stretch
across country! No Grundyism in Rhoda Nunn; no simpering, no mincing of
phrases. Why, a man might do worse than secure her for his comrade
through the whole journey of life.

Suppose he pushed his joke to the very point of asking her to marry
him? Undoubtedly she would refuse; but how enjoyable to watch the proud
vigour of her freedom asserting itself! Yet would not an offer of
marriage be too commonplace? Rather propose to her to share his life in
a free union, without sanction of forms which neither for her nor him
were sanction at all. Was it too bold a thought?

Not if he really meant it. Uttered insincerely, such words would be
insult; she would see through his pretence of earnestness, and then
farewell to her for ever. But if his intellectual sympathy became
tinged with passion--and did he discern no possibility of that? An odd
thing were he to fall in love with Rhoda Nunn. Hitherto his ideal had
been a widely different type of woman; he had demanded rare beauty of
face, and the charm of a refined voluptuousness. To be sure, it was but
an ideal; no woman that approached it had ever come within his sphere.
The dream exercised less power over him than a few years ago; perhaps
because his youth was behind him. Rhoda might well represent the desire
of a mature man, strengthened by modern culture and with his senses
fairly subordinate to reason. Heaven forbid that he should ever tie
himself to the tame domestic female; and just as little could he seek
for a mate among the women of society, the creatures all surface, with
empty pates and vitiated blood. No marriage for him, in the common
understanding of the word. He wanted neither offspring nor a 'home'.
Rhoda Nunn, if she thought of such things at all, probably desired a
union which would permit her to remain an intellectual being; the
kitchen, the cradle, and the work-basket had no power over her
imagination. As likely as not, however, she was perfectly content with
single life--even regarded it as essential to her purposes. In her face
he read chastity; her eye avoided no scrutiny; her palm was cold.

One does not break the heart of such a woman. Heartbreak is a very
old-fashioned disorder, associated with poverty of brain. If Rhoda were
what he thought her, she enjoyed this opportunity of studying a modern
male, and cared not how far he proceeded in his own investigations,
sure that at any moment she could bid him fall back. The amusement was
only just beginning. And if for him it became earnest, why what did he
seek but strong experiences?

Rhoda, in the meantime, had gone home. She shut herself in her bedroom,
and remained there until the bell rang for dinner.

Miss Barfoot entered the dining-room just before her; they sat down in
silence, and through the meal exchanged but a few sentences, relative
to a topic of the hour which interested neither of them.

The elder woman had a very unhappy countenance; she looked worn out;
her eyes never lifted themselves from the table.

Dinner over, Miss Barfoot went to the drawing-room alone. She had sat
there about half an hour, brooding, unoccupied, when Rhoda came in and
stood before her.

'I have been thinking it over. It isn't right for me to remain here.
Such an arrangement was only possible whilst we were on terms of
perfect understanding.'

'You must do what you think best, Rhoda,' the other replied gravely,
but with no accent of displeasure.

'Yes, I had better take a lodging somewhere. What I wish to know is,
whether you can still employ me with any satisfaction?'

'I don't employ you. That is not the word to describe your relations
with me. If we must use business language, you are simply my partner.'

'Only your kindness put me into that position. When you no longer
regard me as a friend, I am only in your employment.'

'I haven't ceased to regard you as a friend. The estrangement between
us is entirely of your making.'

Seeing that Rhoda would not sit down, Miss Barfoot rose and stood by
the fireplace.

'I can't bear reproaches,' said the former; 'least of all when they are
irrational and undeserved.'

'If I reproached you, it was in a tone which should never have given
you offence. One would think that I had rated you like a disobedient
servant.'

'If _that_ had been possible,' answered Rhoda, with a faint smile, 'I
should never have been here. You said that you bitterly repented having
given way to me on a certain occasion. That was unreasonable; in giving
way, you declared yourself convinced. And the reproach I certainly
didn't deserve, for I had behaved conscientiously.'

'Isn't it allowed me to disapprove of what your conscience dictates?'

'Not when you have taken the same view, and acted upon it. I don't lay
claim to many virtues, and I haven't that of meekness. I could never
endure anger; my nature resents it.'

'I did wrong to speak angrily, but indeed I hardly knew what I was
saying. I had suffered a terrible shock. I loved that poor girl; I
loved her all the more for what I had seen of her since she came to
implore my help. Your utter coldness--it seemed to me inhuman--I shrank
from you. If your face had shown ever so little compassion--'

'I _felt_ no compassion.'

'No. You have hardened your heart with theory. Guard yourself, Rhoda!
To work for women one must keep one's womanhood. You are becoming--you
are wandering as far from the true way--oh, much further than Bella
did!'

'I can't answer you. When we argued about our differences in a friendly
spirit, all was permissible; now if I spoke my thought it would be mere
harshness and cause of embitterment. I fear all is at an end between
us. I should perpetually remind you of this sorrow.'

There was a silence of some length. Rhoda turned away, and stood in
reflection.

'Let us do nothing hastily,' said Miss Barfoot. 'We have more to think
of than our own feelings.'

'I have said that I am quite willing to go on with my work, but it must
be on a different footing. The relation between us can no longer be
that of equals. I am content to follow your directions. But your
dislike of me will make this impossible.'

'Dislike? You misunderstand me wretchedly. I think rather it is you who
dislike me, as a weak woman with no command of her emotions.'

Again they ceased from speech. Presently Miss Barfoot stepped forward.

'Rhoda, I shall be away all to-morrow; I may not return to London until
Monday morning. Will you think quietly over it all? Believe me, I am
not angry with you, and as for disliking you--what nonsense are we
talking! But I can't regret that I let you see how painfully your
behaviour impressed me. That hardness is not natural to you. You have
encouraged yourself in it, and you are warping a very noble character.'

'I wish only to be honest. Where you felt compassion I felt
indignation.'

'Yes; we have gone through all that. The indignation was a forced,
exaggerated sentiment. You can't see it in that light perhaps. But try
to imagine for a moment that Bella had been your sister--'

'That is confusing the point at issue,' Rhoda exclaimed irritably.
'Have I ever denied the force of such feelings? My grief would have
blinded me to all larger considerations, of course. But she was happily
_not_ my sister, and I remained free to speak the simple truth about
her case. It isn't personal feeling that directs a great movement in
civilization. If you were right, I also was right. You should have
recognized the inevitable discord of our Opinions at that moment.'

'It didn't seem to me inevitable.'

'I should have despised myself if I could have affected sympathy.'

'Affected--yes.'

'Or have really felt it. That would have meant that I did not know
myself. I should never again have dared to speak on any grave subject.'

Miss Barfoot smiled sadly.

'How young you are! Oh, there is far more than ten years between our
ages, Rhoda! In spirit you are a young girl, and I an old woman. No,
no; we _will not_ quarrel. Your companionship is far too precious to
me, and I dare to think that mine is not without value for you. Wait
till my grief has had its course; then I shall be more reasonable and
do you more justice.'

Rhoda turned towards the door, lingered, but without looking back, and
so left the room.

Miss Barfoot was absent as she had announced, returning only in time
for her duties in Great Portland Street on Monday morning. She and
Rhoda then shook hands, but without a word of personal reference. They
went through the day's work as usual.

This was the day of the month on which Miss Barfoot would deliver her
four o'clock address. The subject had been announced a week ago: 'Woman
as an Invader.' An hour earlier than usual work was put aside, and
seats were rapidly arranged for the small audience; it numbered only
thirteen--the girls already on the premises and a few who came
specially. All were aware of the tragedy in which Miss Barfoot had
recently been concerned; her air of sadness, so great a contrast to
that with which she was wont to address them, they naturally attributed
to this cause.

As always, she began in the simplest conversational tone. Not long
since she had received an anonymous letter, written by some clerk out
of employment, abusing her roundly for her encouragement of female
competition in the clerkly world. The taste of this epistle was as bad
as its grammar, but they should hear it; she read it all through. Now,
whoever the writer might be, it seemed pretty clear that he was not the
kind of person with whom one could profitably argue; no use in replying
to him, even had he given the opportunity. For all that, his uncivil
attack had a meaning, and there were plenty of people ready to urge his
argument in more respectable terms. 'They will tell you that, in
entering the commercial world, you not only unsex yourselves, but do a
grievous wrong to the numberless men struggling hard for bare
sustenance. You reduce salaries, you press into an already overcrowded
field, you injure even your own sex by making it impossible for men to
marry, who, if they earned enough, would be supporting a wife.' To-day,
continued Miss Barfoot, it was not her purpose to debate the economic
aspects of the question. She would consider it from another point of
view, repeating, perhaps, much that she had already said to them on
other occasions, but doing so because these thoughts had just now very
strong possession of her mind.

This abusive correspondent, who declared that he was supplanted by a
young woman who did his work for smaller payment, doubtless had a
grievance. But, in the miserable disorder of our social state, one
grievance had to be weighed against another, and Miss Barfoot held that
there was much more to be urged on behalf of women who invaded what had
been exclusively the men's sphere, than on behalf of the men who began
to complain of this invasion.

'They point to half a dozen occupations which are deemed strictly
suitable for women. Why don't we confine ourselves to this ground? Why
don't I encourage girls to become governesses, hospital nurses, and so
on? You think I ought to reply that already there are too many
applicants for such places. It would be true, but I don't care to make
use of the argument, which at once involves us in a debate with the
out-crowded clerk. No; to put the truth in a few words, I am not
chiefly anxious that you should _earn money_, but that women in general
shall become _rational and responsible human beings_.

'Follow me carefully. A governess, a nurse, may be the most admirable
of women. I will dissuade no one from following those careers who is
distinctly fitted for them. But these are only a few out of the vast
number of girls who must, if they are not to be despicable persons,
somehow find serious work. Because I myself have had an education in
clerkship, and have most capacity for such employment, I look about for
girls of like mind, and do my best to prepare them for work in offices.
And (here I must become emphatic once more) I am _glad_ to have entered
on this course. I am _glad_ that I can show girls the way to a career
which my opponents call unwomanly.

'Now see why. Womanly and womanish are two very different words; but
the latter, as the world uses it, has become practically synonymous
with the former. A womanly occupation means, practically, an occupation
that a man disdains. And here is the root of the matter. I repeat that
I am not first of all anxious to keep you supplied with daily bread. I
am a troublesome, aggressive, revolutionary person. I want to do away
with that common confusion of the words womanly and womanish, and I see
very clearly that this can only be effected by an armed movement, an
invasion by women of the spheres which men have always forbidden us to
enter. I am strenuously opposed to that view of us set forth in such
charming language by Mr. Ruskin--for it tells on the side of those men
who think and speak of us in a way the reverse of charming. Were we
living in an ideal world, I think women would not go to sit all day in
offices. But the fact is that we live in a world as far from ideal as
can be conceived. We live in a time of warfare, of revolt. If woman is
no longer to be womanish, but a human being of powers and
responsibilities, she must become militant, defiant. She must push her
claims to the extremity.

'An excellent governess, a perfect hospital nurse, do work which is
invaluable; but for our cause of emancipation they are no good--nay,
they are harmful. Men point to them, and say: Imitate these, keep to
your proper world. Our proper world is the world of intelligence, of
honest effort, of moral strength. The old types of womanly perfection
are no longer helpful to us. Like the Church service, which to all but
one person in a thousand has become meaningless gabble by dint of
repetition, these types have lost their effect. They are no longer
educational. We have to ask ourselves: What course of training will
wake women up, make them conscious of their souls, startle them into
healthy activity?'

'It must be something new, something free from the reproach of
womanliness. I don't care whether we crowd out the men or not. I don't
care _what_ results, if only women are made strong and self-reliant and
nobly independent! The world must look to its concerns. Most likely we
shall have a revolution in the social order greater than any that yet
seems possible. Let it come, and let us help its coming. When I think
of the contemptible wretchedness of women enslaved by custom, by their
weakness, by their desires, I am ready to cry, Let the world perish in
tumult rather than things go on in this way!'

For a moment her voice failed. There were tears in her eyes. The
hearers, most of them, understood what made her so passionate; they
exchanged grave looks.

'Our abusive correspondent shall do as best he can. He suffers for the
folly of men in all ages. We can't help it. It is very far from our
wish to cause hardship to any one, but we ourselves are escaping from a
hardship that has become intolerable. We are educating ourselves. There
must be a new type of woman, active in every sphere of life: a new
worker out in the world, a new ruler of the home. Of the old ideal
virtues we can retain many, but we have to add to them those which have
been thought appropriate only in men. Let a woman be gentle, but at the
same time let her be strong; let her be pure of heart, but none the
less wise and instructed. Because we have to set an example to the
sleepy of our sex, we must carry on an active warfare--must be
invaders. Whether woman is the equal of man I neither know nor care. We
are not his equal in size, in weight, in muscle, and, for all I can
say, we may have less power of brain. That has nothing to do with it.
Enough for us to know that our natural growth has been stunted. The
mass of women have always been paltry creatures, and their paltriness
has proved a curse to men. So, if you like to put it in this way, we
are working for the advantage of men as well as for our own. Let the
responsibility for disorder rest on those who have made us despise our
old selves. At any cost--at any cost--we will free ourselves from the
heritage of weakness and contempt!'

The assembly was longer than usual in dispersing. When all were gone,
Miss Barfoot listened for a footstep in the other room. As she could
detect no sound, she went to see if Rhoda was there or not.

Yes; Rhoda was sitting in a thoughtful attitude. She looked up, smiled,
and came a few paces forward.

'It was very good.'

'I thought it would please you.'

Miss Barfoot drew nearer, and added,--

'It was addressed to you. It seemed to me that you had forgotten how I
really thought about these things.'

'I have been ill-tempered,' Rhoda replied. 'Obstinacy is one of my
faults.'

'It is.'

Their eyes met.

'I believe,' continued Rhoda, 'that I ought to ask your pardon. Right
or wrong, I behaved in an unmannerly way.'

'Yes, I think you did.'

Rhoda smiled, bending her head to the rebuke.

'And there's the last of it,' added Miss Barfoot. 'Let us kiss and be
friends.'




CHAPTER XIV

MOTIVES MEETING


When Barfoot made his next evening call Rhoda did not appear. He sat
for some time in pleasant talk with his cousin, no reference whatever
being made to Miss Nunn; then at length, beginning to fear that he
would not see her, he inquired after her health. Miss Nunn was very
well, answered the hostess, smiling.

'Not at home this evening?'

'Busy with some kind of study, I think.'

Plainly, the difference between these women had come to a happy end, as
Barfoot foresaw that it would. He thought it better to make no mention
of his meeting with Rhoda in the gardens.

'That was a very unpleasant affair that I saw your name connected with
last week,' he said presently.

'It made me very miserable--ill indeed for a day or two.'

'That was why you couldn't see me?'

'Yes.'

'But in your reply to my note you made no mention of the circumstances.'

Miss Barfoot kept silence; frowning slightly, she looked at the fire
near which they were both sitting, for the weather had become very cold.

'No doubt,' pursued Everard, glancing at her, 'you refrained out of
delicacy--on my account, I mean.'

'Need we talk of it?'

'For a moment, please. You are very friendly with me nowadays, but I
