we can escape discovery, and live for each other without any shame or
fear to disturb us. You will be my own dear true wife. I will love and
guard you as long as I live.'

He embraced her with placid tenderness, laying his cheek against hers,
kissing her hands.

'We must see each other again,' he continued. 'Come on Sunday, will
you? And in the meantime find out some place where I could address
letters to you. You can always find a stationer's shop where they will
receive letters. Be guided by me, dear little girl. Only a week or
two--to save the happiness of our whole lives.'

Monica listened, but with half-attention, her look fixed on the floor.
Encouraged by her silence, the lover went on in a strain of heightening
enthusiasm, depicting the raptures of their retirement from the world
in some suburb of Bordeaux. How this retreat was to escape the notice
of his business companions, through whom the scandal might get wind, he
did not suggest. The truth was, Bevis found himself in an extremely
awkward position, with issues he had not contemplated, and all he cared
for was to avert the immediate peril of public discovery. The
easy-going, kindly fellow had never considered all the responsibility
involved in making mild love--timorously selfish from the first--to a
married woman who took his advances with desperate seriousness. He had
not in him the stuff of vigorous rascality, still less the only other
quality which can support a man in such a situation as this--heroism of
moral revolt. So he cut a very poor figure, and was dolefully aware of
it. He talked, talked; trying to disguise his feebleness in tinsel
phrases; and Monica still kept her eyes cast down.

When another half-hour had passed, she sighed deeply and rose from her
seat. She would write to him, she said, and let him know where a reply
would reach her. No, she must not come here again; all he had to tell
her would be communicated by letter. The subdued tone, the simple
sadness of her words, distressed Bevis, and yet he secretly
congratulated himself. He had done nothing for which this woman could
justly reproach him; marvellous--so he considered--had been his
self-restraint; absolutely, he had behaved 'like a gentleman.' To be
sure, he was miserably in love, and, if circumstances by any means
allowed of it, would send for Monica to join him in France. Should the
thing prove impossible, he had nothing whatever on his conscience.

He held out his arms to her. Monica shook her head and looked away.

'Say once more that you love me, darling,' he pleaded. 'I shall not
rest for an hour until I am able to write and say, "Come to me."'

She permitted him to hold her once more in his soft embrace.

'Kiss me, Monica!'

She put her lips to his cheek, and withdrew them, still shunning his
look.

'Oh, not that kind of kiss. Like you kissed me before.'

'I can't,' she replied, with choking voice, the tears again starting
forth.

'But what have I done that you should love me less, dearest?'

He kissed the falling drops, murmuring assurances, encouragements.

'You shan't leave me until I have heard you say that your love is
unchanged. Whisper it to me, sweetest!'

'When we meet again--not now.'

'You frighten me. Monica, we are not saying good-bye for ever?'

'If you send for me I _will_ come.'

'You promise faithfully? You will come?'

'If you send for me I will come.'

That was her last word. He opened the door for her, and listened as she
departed.




CHAPTER XXIII

IN AMBUSH


Hitherto, Widdowson had entertained no grave mistrust of his wife. The
principles she had avowed, directly traceable as it seemed to her
friendship with the militant women in Chelsea, he disliked and feared;
but her conduct he fully believed to be above reproach. His jealously
of Barfoot did not glance at Monica's attitude towards the man; merely
at the man himself, whom he credited with native scoundreldom. Barfoot
represented to his mind a type of licentious bachelor; why, he could
not have made perfectly clear to his own understanding. Possibly the
ease of Everard's bearing, the something aristocratic in his
countenance and his speech, the polish of his manner, especially in
formal converse with women, from the first grave offence to Widdowson's
essentially middle-class sensibilities. If Monica were in danger at
all, it was, he felt convinced, from that quarter. The subject of his
wife's intimate dialogue with Barfoot at the Academy still remained a
mystery to him. He put faith in her rebellious declaration that every
word might have been safely repeated in his hearing, but, be the matter
what it might, the manner of Barfoot's talk meant evil. Of that
conviction he could not get rid.

He had read somewhere that a persistently jealous husband may not
improbably end by irritating an innocent wife into affording real
ground for jealousy. A man with small knowledge of the world is much
impressed by dicta such as there; they get into the crannies of his
mind, and thence direct the course of his thinking. Widdowson, before
his marriage, had never suspected the difficulty of understanding a
woman; had he spoken his serious belief on that subject, it would have
been found to represent the most primitive male conception of the
feminine being. Women were very like children; it was rather a task to
amuse them and to keep them out of mischief. Therefore the blessedness
of household toil, in especial the blessedness of child-bearing and all
that followed. Intimacy with Monica had greatly affected his views, yet
chiefly by disturbing them; no firmer ground offered itself to his
threading when he perforce admitted that his former standpoint was
every day assailed by some incontestable piece of evidence. Woman had
individual characters; that discovery, though not a very profound one,
impressed him with the force of something arrived at by independent
observation. Monica often puzzled him gravely; he could not find the
key to her satisfactions and discontents. To regard her simply as a
human being was beyond the reach of his intelligence. He cast the blame
of his difficulties upon sex, and paid more attention to the hints on
such afforded him by his reading. He would endeavour to keep his
jealousy out of sight, lest the mysterious tendency of the female
nature might prompt Monica to deliberate wrongdoing.

To-day for the first time there flashed across him the thought that
already he might have been deceived. It originated in a peculiarity of
Monica's behaviour at luncheon. She ate scarcely anything; she seemed
hurried, frequently glancing at the clock; and she lost herself in
reverie. Discovering that his eye was upon her, she betrayed
uneasiness, and began to talk without considering what she meant to
say. All this might mean nothing more than her barely-concealed regret
at being obliged to leave London; but Widdowson remarked it with a
vivacity of feeling perhaps due to the excitement in which he had lived
for the past week. Perhaps the activity, the resolution to which he had
urged himself, caused a sharpening of his perceptions. And the very
thought, never out of his mind, that only a few days had to elapse
before he carried off his wife from the scene of peril, tended to make
him more vividly conscious of that peril. Certain it was that a
moment's clairvoyance assailed his peace, and left behind it all manner
of ugly conjectures. Woman--so said the books--are adepts at
dissimulation. Was it conceivable that Monica had taken advantage of
the liberty he had of late allowed her? If a woman could not endure a
direct, searching gaze, must it not imply some enormous
wickedness?--seeing that nature has armed them for this very trial.

In her setting forth for the railway station hurry was again evident,
and disinclination to exchange parting words. If the eagerness were
simple and honest, would she not have accepted his suggestion and have
gone in the morning?

For five minutes after her departure he stood in the hall, staring
before him. A new jealousy, a horrible constriction of the heart, had
begun to torture him. He went and walked about in the library, but
could not dispel his suffering. Vain to keep repeating that Monica was
incapable of baseness. Of that he was persuaded, but none the less a
hideous image returned upon his mental vision--a horror--a pollution of
thought.

One thing he could do to restore his sanity. He would walk over to
Lavender Hill, and accompany his wife on her return home. Indeed, the
mere difficulty of getting through the afternoon advised this project.
He could not employ himself, and knew that his imagination, once
inflamed, would leave him not a moment's rest. Yes, he would walk to
Lavender Hill, and ramble about that region until Monica had had
reasonable time for talk with her sister.

About three o'clock there fell a heavy shower of rain. Strangely
against his habits, Widdowson turned into a quiet public-house, and sat
for a quarter of an hour at the bar, drinking a glass of whisky. During
the past week he had taken considerably more wine than usual at meals;
he seemed to need the support. Whilst sipping at his glass of spirits,
he oddly enough fell into talk with the barmaid, a young woman of some
charms, and what appeared to be unaffected modesty. Not for twenty
years had Widdowson conversed with a member of this sisterhood. Their
dialogue was made up of the most trifling of trivialities--weather, a
railway accident, the desirability of holidays at this season. And when
at length he rose and put an end to the chat it was with appreciable
reluctance.

'A good, nice sort of girl,' he went away saying to himself. 'Pity she
should be serving at a bar--hearing doubtful talk, and seeing very
often vile sights. A nice, soft-spoken little girl.'

And he mused upon her remembered face with a complacency which soothed
his feelings.

Of a sudden he was checked by the conversion of his sentiment into
thought. Would he not have been a much happier man if he had married a
girl distinctly his inferior in mind and station? Provided she were
sweet, lovable, docile--such a wife would have spared him all the
misery he had known with Monica. From the first he had understood that
Monica was no representative shopgirl, and on that very account he had
striven so eagerly to win her. But it was a mistake. He had loved her,
still loved her, with all the emotion of which he was capable. How many
hours' genuine happiness of soul had that love afforded him? The
minutest fraction of the twelve months for which she had been his wife.
And of suffering, often amounting to frantic misery, he could count
many weeks. Could such a marriage as this be judged a marriage at all,
in any true sense of the word?

'Let me ask myself a question. If Monica were absolutely free to choose
between continuing to live with me and resuming her perfect liberty,
can I persuade myself that she would remain my wife? She would not. Not
for a day, not for an hour. Of that I am morally convinced. And I
acknowledge the grounds of her dissatisfaction. We are unsuited to each
other. We do not understand each other. Our marriage is physical and
nothing more. My love--what is my love? I do not love her mind, her
intellectual part. If I did, this frightful jealousy from which I
suffer would be impossible. My ideal of the wife perfectly suited to me
is far liker that girl at the public-house bar than Monica. Monica's
independence of thought is a perpetual irritation to me. I don't know
what her thoughts really are, what her intellectual life signifies. And
yet I hold her to me with the sternest grasp. If she endeavoured to
release herself I should feel capable of killing her. Is not this a
strange, a brutal thing?'

Widdowson had never before reached this height of speculation. In the
moment, by the very fact, of admitting that Monica and he ought not to
be living together, he became more worthy of his wife's companionship
than ever hitherto.

Well, he would exercise greater forebearance. He would endeavour to win
her respect by respecting the freedom she claimed. His recent
suspicions of her were monstrous. If she knew them, how her soul would
revolt from him! What if she took an interest in other men, perchance
more her equals than he? Why, had he not just been thinking of another
woman, reflecting that she, or one like her, would have made him a more
suitable wife than Monica? Yet this could not reasonably be called
unfaithfulness.

They were bound together for life, and their wisdom lay in mutual
toleration, the constant endeavour to understand each other aright--not
in fierce restraint of each other's mental liberty. How many marriages
were anything more than mutual forbearance? Perhaps there ought not to
be such a thing as enforced permanence of marriage. This was daring
speculation; he could not have endured to hear it from Monica's lips.
But--perhaps, some day, marriage would be dissoluble at the will of
either party to it. Perhaps the man who sought to hold a woman when she
no longer loved him would be regarded with contempt and condemnation.

What a simple thing marriage had always seemed to him, and how far from
simple he had found it! Why, it led him to musings which overset the
order of the world, and flung all ideas of religion and morality into
wildest confusion. It would not do to think like this. He was a man
wedded to a woman very difficult to manage--there was the practical
upshot of the matter. His duty was to manage her. He was responsible
for her right conduct. With intentions perfectly harmless, she might
run into unknown jeopardy--above all, just at this time when she was
taking reluctant leave of her friends. The danger justified him in
exceptional vigilance.

So, from his excursion into the realms of reason did he return to the
safe sphere of the commonplace. And now he might venture to press on
towards Mrs. Conisbee's house, for it was half-past four, and already
Monica must have been talking with her sister for a couple of hours.

His knock at the door was answered by the landlady herself. She told of
Mrs. Widdowson's arrival and departure. Ah, then Monica had no doubt
gone straight home again. But, as Miss Madden had returned, he would
speak with her.

'The poor lady isn't very well, sir,' said Mrs. Conisbee, fingering the
hem of her apron.

'Not very well? But couldn't I see her for a moment?'

Virginia answered this question by appearing on the staircase.

'Some one for me, Mrs. Conisbee?' she called from above. 'Oh, is it
_you_, Edmund? So very glad! I'm sure Mrs. Conisbee will have the
kindness to let you come into her sitting-room. What a pity I was away
when Monica called! I've had--business to see to in town; and I've
walked and walked, until I'm really--hardly able--'

She sank upon a chair in the room, and looked fixedly at the visitor
with a broad, benevolent smile, her head moving up and down. Widdowson
was for a moment in perplexity. If the evidence of his eyes could be
trusted, Miss Madden's indisposition pointed to a cause so strange that
it seemed incredible. He turned to look for Mrs. Conisbee, but the
landlady had hurriedly withdrawn, closing the door behind her.

'It is so foolish of me, Edmund,' Virginia rambled on, addressing him
with a familiarity she had never yet used. 'When I am away from home I
forget all about my meals--really forget--and then all at once I find
that I am quite exhausted--quite exhausted--as you see. And the worst
of it is I have altogether lost my appetite by the time I get back. I
couldn't eat a mouthful of food--not a mouthful--I assure you I
couldn't. And it does so distress good Mrs. Conisbee. She is
exceedingly kind to me--exceedingly careful about my health. Oh, and in
Battersea Park Road I saw such a shocking sight; a great cart ran over
a poor little dog, and it was killed on the spot. It unnerved me
dreadfully. I do think, Edmund, those drivers ought to be more careful.
I was saying to Mrs. Conisbee only the other day--and that reminds me,
I do so want to know all about your visit to Clevedon. Dear, dear
Clevedon! And have you really taken a house there, Edmund? Oh, if we
could all end our days at Clevedon! You know that our dear father and
mother are buried in the old churchyard. You remember Tennyson's lines
about the old church at Clevedon? Oh, and what did Monica decide
about--about--really, what _was_ I going to ask? It is so foolish of me
to forget that dinner-time has come and gone. I get so exhausted, and
even my memory fails me.'

He could doubt no longer. This poor woman had yielded to one of the
temptations that beset a life of idleness and solitude. His pity was
mingled with disgust.

'I only wished to tell you,' he said gravely, 'that we have taken a
house at Clevedon--'

'You really _have_!' She clasped her hands together. 'Whereabouts?'

'Near Dial Hill.'

Virginia began a rhapsody which her brother-in-law had no inclination
to hear. He rose abruptly.

'Perhaps you had better come and see us to-morrow.'

'But Monica left a message that she wouldn't be at home for the next
few days, and that I wasn't to come till I heard from her.'

'Not at home--? I think there's a mistake.'

'Oh, impossible! We'll ask Mrs. Conisbee.'

She went to the door and called. From the landlady Widdowson learnt
exactly what Monica had said. He reflected for a moment.

'She shall write to you then. Don't come just yet. I mustn't stay any
longer now.'

And with a mere pretence of shaking hands he abruptly left the house.

Suspicions thickened about him. He would have thought it utterly
impossible for Miss Madden to disgrace herself in this vulgar way, and
the appalling discovery affected his view of Monica. They were sisters;
they had characteristics in common, family traits, weaknesses. If the
elder woman could fall into this degradation, might there not be
possibilities in Monica's character such as he had refused to
contemplate? Was there not terrible reason for mistrusting her? What
did she mean by her message to Virginia.

Black and haggard, he went home as fast as a hansom could take him. It
was half-past five when he reached the house. His wife was not here,
and had not been here.

At this moment Monica was starting by train from Bayswater, after her
parting with Bevis. Arrived at Victoria, she crossed to the main
station, and went to the ladies' waiting-room for the purpose of
bathing her face. She had red, swollen eyes, and her hair was in slight
disorder. This done, she inquired as to the next train for Herne Hill.
One had just gone; another would leave in about a quarter of an hour.

A dreadful indecision was harassing her. Ought she, did she dare, to
return home at all? Even if her strength sufficed for simulating a
natural manner, could she consent to play so base a part?

There was but one possible alternative. She might go to Virginia's
lodgings, and there remain, writing to her husband that she had left
him. The true cause need not be confessed. She would merely declare
that life with him had become intolerable to her, that she demanded a
release. Their approaching removal to Clevedon offered the occasion.
She would say that her endurance failed before that prospect of
solitude, and that, feeling as she did, it was dishonourable to make
longer pretence of doing her duty as a wife. Then, if Bevis wrote to
her in such a way as to revive her love, if he seriously told her to
come to him, all difficulties could be solved by her disappearance.

Was such revival of disheartened love a likely or a possible thing? At
this moment she felt that to flee in secret, and live with Bevis as he
proposed, would be no less dishonour than abiding with the man who had
a legal claim upon her companionship. Her lover, as she had thought of
him for the past two or three months, was only a figment of her
imagination; Bevis had proved himself a complete stranger to her mind;
she must reshape her knowledge of him. His face was all that she could
still dwell upon with the old desire; nay, even that had suffered a
change.

Insensibly the minutes went by. Whilst she sat in the waiting-room her
train started; and when she had become aware of that, her irresolution
grew more tormenting.

Suddenly there came upon her a feeling of illness, of nausea.
Perspiration broke out on her forehead; her eyes dazzled; she had to
let her head fall back. It passed, but in a minute or two the fit again
seized her, and with a moan she lost consciousness.

Two or three women who were in the room rendered assistance. The
remarks they exchanged, though expressing uncertainty and discreetly
ambiguous, would have been significant to Monica. On her recovery,
which took place in a few moments, she at once started up, and with
hurried thanks to those about her, listening to nothing that was said
and answering no inquiry, went out on to the platform. There was just
time to catch the train now departing for Herne Hill.

She explained her fainting fit by the hours of agitation through which
she had passed. There was no room for surprise. She had suffered
indescribably, and still suffered. Her wish was to get back into the
quietness of home, to rest and to lose herself in sleep.

* * * * * * * * * *

On entering, she saw nothing of her husband. His hat hung on the
hall-tree, and he was perhaps sitting in the library; the more genial
temper would account for his not coming forth at once to meet her, as
had been his custom when she returned from an absence alone.

She changed her dress, and disguised as far as was possible the traces
of suffering on her features. Weakness and tremor urged her to lie
down, but she could not venture to do this until she had spoken to her
husband. Supporting herself by the banisters, she slowly descended, and
opened the library door. Widdowson was reading a newspaper. He did not
look round, but said carelessly,--

'So you are back?'

'Yes. I hope you didn't expect me sooner.'

'Oh, it's all right.' He threw a rapid glance at her over his shoulder.
'Had a long talk with Virginia, I suppose?'

'Yes. I couldn't get away before.'

Widdowson seemed to be much interested in some paragraph. He put his
face closer to the paper, and was silent for two or three seconds. Then
he again looked round, this time observing his wife steadily, but with
a face that gave no intimation of unusual thoughts.

'Does she consent to go?'

Monica replied that it was still uncertain; she thought, however, that
Virginia's objections would be overcome.

'You look very tired,' remarked the other.

'I am, very.'

And thereupon she withdrew, unable to command her countenance, scarce
able to remain standing for another moment.




CHAPTER XXIV

TRACKED


When Widdowson went up to the bedroom that night, Monica was already
asleep. He discovered this on turning up the gas. The light fell upon
her face, and he was drawn to the bedside to look at her. The features
signified nothing but repose; her lips were just apart, her eyelids lay
softly with their black fringe of exquisite pencilling, and her hair
was arranged as she always prepared it for the pillow. He watched her
for full five minutes, and detected not the slightest movement, so
profound was her sleep. Then he turned away, muttering savagely under
his breath, 'Hypocrite! Liar!'

But for a purpose in his thoughts he would not have lain down beside
her. On getting into bed he kept as far away as possible, and all
through the wakeful night his limbs shrank from the touch of hers.

He rose an hour earlier than usual. Monica had long been awake, but she
moved so seldom that he could not be sure of this; her face was turned
from him. When he came back to the room after his bath. Monica propped
herself on her elbow and asked why he was moving so early.

'I want to be in the City at nine,' he replied, with a show of
cheerfulness. 'There's a money affair I must see after.'

'Something that's going wrong?'

'I'm afraid so. I must lose no time in looking to it. What plans have
you for to-day?'

'None whatever.'

'It's Saturday, you know. I promised to see Newdick this afternoon.
Perhaps I may bring him to dinner.'

About twelve o'clock he returned from his business. At two he went away
again, saying that he should not be back before seven, it might be a
little later. In Monica these movements excited no special remark; they
were merely a continuance of his restlessness. But no sooner had he
departed, after luncheon, than she went to her dressing-room, and began
to make slow, uncertain preparations for leaving home herself.

This morning she had tried to write a letter for Bevis, but vainly. She
knew not what to say to him, uncertain of her own desires and of what
lay before her. Yet, if she were to communicate with him henceforth at
all, it was necessary, this very afternoon, to find an address where
letters could be received for her, and to let him know of it.
To-morrow, Sunday, was useless for the purpose, and on Monday it might
be impossible for her to go out alone. Besides that, she could not be
sure of the safety of a letter delivered at the flat on Monday night or
Tuesday morning.

She dressed at length and went out. Her wisest course, probably, was to
seek for some obliging shopkeeper near Lavender Hill. Then she could
call on Virginia, transact the business she had pretended to discharge
yesterday, and there pen a note to Bevis.

Her moods alternated with distracting rapidity. A hundred times she had
resolved that Bevis could be nothing more to her, and again had thought
of him with impulses of yearning, trying to persuade herself that he
had acted well and wisely. A hundred times she determined to carry out
her idea of yesterday--to quit her husband and resist all his efforts
to recall her--and again had all but resigned herself to live with him,
accepting degradation as so many wives perforce did. Her mind was in
confusion, and physically she felt far from well. A heaviness weighed
upon her limbs, making it hardship to walk however short a distance.

Arrived at Clapham Junction, she began to search wearily,
indifferently, for the kind of shop that might answer her purpose. The
receiving of letters which, for one reason or another, must be
dispatched to a secret address, is a very ordinary complaisance on the
part of small London stationers; hundreds of such letters are sent and
called for every week within the metropolitan postal area. It did not
take Monica long to find an obliging shopkeeper; the first to whom she
applied--a decent woman behind a counter which displayed newspapers,
tobacco, and fancy articles--willingly accepted the commission.

She came out of the shop with flushed cheeks. Another step in shameful
descent--yet it had the result of strengthening once more her emotions
favourable to Bevis. On his account she had braved this ignominy, and
it drew her towards him, instead of producing the effect which would
have seemed more natural. Perhaps the reason was that she felt herself
more hopelessly an outcast from the world of honourable women, and
therefore longed in her desolation for the support of a man's love. Did
he not love her? It was _her_ fault if she expected him to act with a
boldness that did not lie in his nature. Perhaps his discretion, which
she had so bitterly condemned as weakness, meant a wise regard for her
interests as well as his own. The public scandal of divorce was a
hideous thing. If it damaged his prospects and sundered him from his
relatives, how could she hope that his love of her, the cause of it
all, would long endure?

The need of love overcame her. She would submit to any conditions
rather than lose this lover whose kisses were upon her lips, and whose
arms had held her so passionately. She was too young to accept a life
of resignation, too ardent. Why had she left him in despondency, in
doubt whether he would ever again see her?

* * * * * * * * * *

She turned back on her way to Virginia's lodgings, re-entered the
station, and journeyed townwards. It was an odd incident, by Monica
unperceived, that when she was taking her ticket there stood close by
her a man, seemingly a mechanic, who had also stood within hearing when
she booked at Herne Hill. This same man, though he had not travelled in
the compartment with her, followed her when she alighted at Bayswater.
She did not once observe him.

Instead of writing, she had resolved to see Bevis again--if it were
possible. Perhaps he would not be at the flat; yet his wish might
suggest the bare hope of her coming to-day. The risk of meeting Barfoot
probably need not be considered, for he had told her that he was
travelling to-day into Cumberland, and for so long a journey he would
be sure to set forth in the morning. At worst she would suffer a
disappointment. Indulgence of her fervid feelings had made her as eager
to see Bevis as she was yesterday. Words of tenderness rushed to her
lips for utterance. When she reached the building all but delirium
possessed her.

She had hurried up to the first landing, when a footstep behind drew
her attention. It was a man in mechanic's dress, coming up with head
bent, doubtless for some task or other in one of the flats. Perhaps he
was going to Bevis's. She went forward more slowly, and on the next
landing allowed the man to pass her. Yes, more likely than not he was
engaged in packing her lover's furniture. She stood still. At that
moment a door closed above, and another step, lighter and quicker, that
of a woman, came downstairs. As far as her ear could judge, this person
might have left Bevis's flat. A conflict of emotions excited her to
panic. She was afraid either to advance or to retreat, and in equal
dread of standing without purpose. She stepped up to the nearest door,
and gave a summons with the knocker.

This door was Barfoot's. She knew that; in the first instant of fear
occasioned by the workman's approach, she had glanced at the door and
reminded herself that here Mr. Barfoot dwelt, immediately beneath
Bevis. But for the wild alarm due to her conscience-stricken state she
could not have risked the possibility of the tenant being still at
home; and yet it seemed to her that she was doing the only thing
possible under the circumstances. For this woman whom she heard just
above might perchance be one of Bevis's sisters, returned to London for
some purpose or other, and in that case she preferred being seen at
Barfoot's door to detection as she made for her lover's.

Uncertainty on this point lasted but a few seconds. Dreading to look at
the woman, Monica yet did so, just as she passed, and beheld the face
of a perfect stranger. A young and good-looking face, however. Her
mind, sufficiently tumultuous, received a new impulse of disturbance.
Had this woman come forth from Bevis's fiat or from the one
opposite?--for on each floor there were two dwellings.

In the meantime no one answered her knock. Mr. Barfoot had gone; she
breathed thankfully. Now she might venture to ascend to the next floor.
But then sounded a knock from above. That, she felt convinced, was at
Bevis's door, and if so her conjecture about the workman was correct.
She stood waiting for certainty, as if still expecting a reply to her
own signal at Mr. Barfoot's door. The mechanic looked down at her over
the banisters, but of this she was unaware.

The knock above was repeated. Yes, this time there could be no mistake;
it was on this side of the landing--that is to say, at her lover's
door. But the door did not open; thus, without going up herself, she
received assurance that Bevis was not at home. He might come later. She
still had an hour or two to spare. So, as if disappointed in a call at
Mr. Barfoot's, she descended the stairs and issued into the street.

Agitation had exhausted her, and a dazzling of her eyes threatened a
recurrence of yesterday's faintness. She found a shop where
refreshments were sold, and sat for half an hour over a cup of tea,
trying to amuse herself with illustrated papers. The mechanic who had
knocked at Bevis's door passed once or twice along the pavement, and,
as long as she remained here, kept the shop within sight.

At length she asked for writing materials, and penned a few lines. If
on her second attempt she failed to see Bevis, she would drop this note
into his letter-box. It acquainted him with the address to which he
might direct letters, assured him passionately of her love, and
implored him to be true to her, to send for her as soon as
circumstances made it possible.

Self-torment of every kind was natural to her position. Though the
relief of escaping from several distinct dangers had put her mind
comparatively at ease for a short time, she had now begun to suffer a
fresh uneasiness with reference to the young and handsome woman who
came downstairs. The fact that no one answered the workman's knock had
seemed to her a sufficient proof that Bevis was not at home, and that
the stranger must have come forth from the flat opposite his. But she
recollected the incident which had so alarmingly disturbed her and her
lover yesterday. Bevis did not then go to the door, and suppose--oh, it
was folly! But suppose that woman had been with him; suppose he did not
care to open to a visitor whose signal sounded only a minute or two
after that person's departure?

Had she not anguish enough to endure without the addition of frantic
jealousy? She would not give another thought to such absurd
suggestions. The woman had of course come from the dwelling opposite.
Yet why might she not have been in Bevis's flat when he himself was
absent? Suppose her an intimate to whom he had entrusted a latch-key.
If any such connection existed, might it not help to explain Bevis's
half-heartedness?

To think thus was courting madness. Unable to sit still any longer,
Monica left the shop, and strayed for some ten minutes about the
neighbouring streets, drawing nearer and nearer to her goal. Finally
she entered the building and went upstairs. On this occasion no one met
her, and no one entered in her rear. She knocked at her lover's door,
and stood longing, praying, that it might open. But it did not. Tears
started to her eyes; she uttered a moan of bitterest disappointment,
and slipped the envelope she was carrying into the letter-box.

The mechanic had seen her go in, and he waited outside, a few yards
away. Either she would soon reappear, or her not doing so would show
that she had obtained admittance somewhere. In the latter case, this
workman of much curiosity and leisure had only to lurk about the
staircase until she came forth again. But this trial of patience was
spared him. He found that he had simply to follow the lady back to
Herne Hill. Acting on very suggestive instructions, it never occurred
to the worthy man that the lady's second visit was not to the same flat
as in the former instance.

Monica was home again long before dinner-time. When that hour arrived
her husband had not yet come; the delay, no doubt, was somehow
connected with his visit to Mr. Newdick. But this went on. At nine
o'clock Monica still sat alone, hungry, yet scarce conscious of hunger
owing to her miseries. Widdowson had never behaved thus. Another
quarter of an hour and she heard the front door open.

He came to the drawing-room, where she sat waiting.

'How late you are! Are you alone?'

'Yes, alone.'

'You haven't had dinner?'

'No.'

He seemed to be in rather a gloomy mood, but Monica noticed nothing
that alarmed her. He was drawing nearer, his eyes on the ground.

'Have you had bad news--in the City?'

'Yes, I have.'

Still he came nearer, and at length, when a yard or two away, raised
his look to her face.

'Have you been out this afternoon?'

She was prompted to a falsehood, but durst not utter it, so keenly was
he regarding her.

'Yes, I went to see Miss Barfoot.'

'Liar!'

As the word burst from his lips, he sprang at her, clutched her dress
at the throat, and flung her violently upon her knees. A short cry of
terror escaped her; then she was stricken dumb, with eyes starting and
mouth open. It was well that he held her by the garment and not by the
neck, for his hand closed with murderous convulsion, and the desire of
crushing out her life was for an instant all his consciousness.

'Liar!' again burst from him. 'Day after day you have lied to me. Liar!
Adultress!'

'I am not! I am not that!'

She clung upon his arms and strove to raise herself. The bloodless
lips, the choked voice, meant dread of him, but the distortion of her
features was hatred and the will to resist.

'Not that? What is your word worth? The prostitute in the street is
sooner to be believed. She has the honesty to say what she is, but
you--Where were you yesterday when you were not at your sister's? Where
were you this afternoon?'

She had nearly struggled to her feet; he thrust her down again, crushed
her backwards until her head all but touched the floor.

'Where were you? Tell the truth, or you shall never speak again!'

'Oh--help! help! He will kill me!'

Her cry rang through the room.

'Call them up--let them come and look at you and hear what you are.
Soon enough every one will know. Where were you this afternoon? You
were watched every step of the way from here to that place where you
have made yourself a base, vile, unclean creature--.'

'I am not that! Your spies have misled you.'

'Misled? Didn't you go to that man Barfoot's door and knock there? And
because you were disappointed, didn't you wait about, and go there a
second time?'

'What if I did? It doesn't mean what you think.'

'What? You go time after time to the private chambers of an unmarried
man--a man such as that--and it means no harm?'

'I have never been there before.'

'You expect me to believe you?' Widdowson cried with savage contumely.
He had just loosed his hold of her, and she was upright again before
him, her eyes flashing defiance, though every muscle in her frame
quivered. 'When did your lies begin? Was it when you told me you had
been to hear Miss Barfoot's lecture, and never went there at all?'

He aimed the charge at a venture, and her face told him that his
suspicion had been grounded.

'For how many weeks, for how many months, have you been dishonouring me
and yourself?'

'I am not guilty of what you believe, but I shan't try to defend
myself. Thank Heaven, this is the end of everything between us! Charge
me with what you like. I am going away from you, and I hope we may
never meet again.'

'Yes, you are going--no doubt of that. But not before you have answered
my questions. Whether with lies or not doesn't matter much. You shall
give your own account of what you have been doing.'

Both panting as if after some supreme effort of their physical force,
they stood and looked at each other. Each to the other's eyes was
incredibly transformed. Monica could not have imagined such brutal
ferocity in her husband's face, and she herself had a wild recklessness
in her eyes, a scorn and abhorrence in all the lines of her
countenance, which made Widdowson feel as if a stranger were before him.

'I shall answer no question whatever,' Monica replied. 'All I want is
to leave your house, and never see you again.'

He regretted what he had done. The result of the first day's espionage
being a piece of evidence so incomplete, he had hoped to command
himself until more solid proof of his wife's guilt were forthcoming.
But jealousy was too strong for such prudence, and the sight of Monica
as she uttered her falsehood made a mere madman of him. Predisposed to
believe a story of this kind, he could not reason as he might have done
if fear of Barfoot had never entered his thoughts. The whole course of
dishonour seemed so clear; he traced it from Monica's earliest meetings
with Barfoot at Chelsea. Wavering between the impulse to cast off his
wife with every circumstance of public shame, and the piteous desire to
arrest her on her path of destruction, he rushed into a middle course,
compatible with neither of these intentions. If at this stage he chose
to tell Monica what had come to his knowledge, it should have been done
with the sternest calm, with dignity capable of shaming her guilt. As
it was, he had spoilt his chances in every direction. Perhaps Monica
understood this; he had begun to esteem her a mistress in craft and
intrigue.

'You say you were never at that man's rooms before to-day?' he asked in
a lower voice.

'What I have said you must take the trouble to recollect. I shall
answer no question.'

Again the impulse assailed him to wring confession from her by terror.
He took a step forward, the demon in his face. Monica in that moment
leapt past him, and reached the door of the room before he could stop
her.

'Stay where you are!' she cried, 'If your hands touch me again I shall
call for help until someone comes up. I won't endure your touch!'

'Do you pretend you are innocent of any crime against me?'

'I am not what you called me. Explain everything as you like. I will
explain nothing. I want only to be free from you.'

She opened the door, rapidly crossed the landing, and went upstairs.
Feeling it was useless to follow, Widdowson allowed the door to remain
wide, and waited. Five minutes passed and Monica came down again,
dressed for leaving the house.

'Where are you going?' he asked, stepping out of the room to intercept
her.

'It is nothing to you. I am going away.'

They subdued their voices, which might else have been audible to the
servants below.

'No, that you shall not!'

He stepped forward to block the head of the stairs, but again Monica
was too quick for him. She fled down, and across the hall, and to the
house-door. Only there, as she was arrested by the difficulty of
drawing back the two latches, did Widdowson overtake her.

'Make what scandal you like, you don't leave this house.'

His tones were violent rather than resolute. What could he do? If
Monica persisted, what means had he of confining her to the
house--short of carrying her by main force to an upper room and there
locking her in? He knew that his courage would not sustain him through
such a task as this.

'For scandal I care nothing,' was her reply. 'One way or another I will
leave the house.'

'Where are you going?'

'To my sister's.'

His hand on the door, Widdowson stood as if determined in opposition.
But her will was stronger than his. Only by homicide can a man maintain
his dignity in a situation of this kind; Widdowson could not kill his
wife, and every moment that he stood there made him more ridiculous,
more contemptible.

He turned back into the hall and reached his hat. Whilst he was doing
so Monica opened the door. Heavy rain was falling, but she paid no heed
to it. In a moment Widdowson hastened after her, careless, he too, of
the descending floods. Her way was towards the railway station, but the
driver of a cab chancing to attract her notice, she accepted the man's
offer, and bade him drive to Lavender Hill.

On the first opportunity Widdowson took like refuge from the rain, and
was driven in the same direction. He alighted not far from Mrs.
Conisbee's house. That Monica had come hither he felt no doubt, but he
would presently make sure of it. As it still rained he sought shelter
in a public-house, where he quenched a painful thirst, and then
satisfied his hunger with such primitive foods as a licensed victualler
is disposed to vend. It was nearing eleven o'clock, and he had neither
eaten nor drunk since luncheon.

After that he walked to Mrs. Conisbee's, and knocked at the door. The
landlady came.

'Will you please to tell me,' he asked 'whether Mrs. Widdowson is here?'

The sly curiosity of the woman's face informed him at once that she saw
something unusual in these circumstances.

'Yes, sir. Mrs. Widdowson is with her sister,'

'Thank you.'

Without another word he departed. But went only a short distance, and
until midnight kept Mrs. Conisbee's door in view. The rain fell, the
air was raw; shelterless, and often shivering with fever, Widdowson
walked the pavement with a constable's regularity. He could not but
remember the many nights when he thus kept watch in Walworth Road and
in Rutland Street, with jealousy, then too, burning in his heart, but
also with amorous ardours, never again to be revived. A little more
than twelve months ago! And he had waited, longed for marriage through
half a lifetime.




CHAPTER XXV

THE FATE OF THE IDEAL


Rhoda's week at the seashore was spoilt by uncertain weather. Only two
days of abiding sunshine; for the rest, mere fitful gleams across a sky
heaped with stormclouds. Over Wastdale hung a black canopy; from
Scawfell came mutterings of thunder; and on the last night of the
week--when Monica fled from her home in pelting rain--tempest broke
upon the mountains and the sea. Wakeful until early morning, and at
times watching the sky from her inland-looking window, Rhoda saw the
rocky heights that frown upon Wastwater illuminated by lightning-flare
of such intensity and duration that miles of distance were annihilated,
and it seemed but a step to these stern crags and precipices.

Sunday began with rain, but also with promise of better things; far
over the sea was a broad expanse of blue, and before long the foam of
the fallen tide glistened in strong, hopeful rays. Rhoda wandered about
the shore towards St. Bees Head. A broad stream flowing into the sea
stopped her progress before she had gone very far; the only way of
crossing it was to go up on to the line of railway, which here runs
along the edge of the sands. But she had little inclination to walk
farther. No house, no person within sight, she sat down to gaze at the
gulls fishing by the little river-mouth, their screams the only sound
that blended with that of the subdued breakers.

On the horizon lay a long, low shape that might have been mistaken for
cloud, though it resembled land. It was the Isle of Man. In an hour or
two the outline had grown much clearer; the heights and hollows were no
longer doubtful. In the north became visible another remote and hilly
tract, it was the coast of Scotland beyond Solway Firth.

These distant objects acted as incentives to Rhoda's imagination. She
heard Everard Barfoot's voice as he talked of travel--of the Orient
Express. That joy of freedom he had offered her. Perhaps he was now
very near her, anxious to repeat his offer. If he carried out the
project suggested at their last interview, she would see him to-day or
to-morrow morning--then she must make her choice. To have a day's walk
with him among the mountains would be practically deciding. But for
what? If she rejected his proposal of a free union, was he prepared to
marry her in legal form? Yes; she had enough power over him for that.
But how would it affect his thought of her? Constraining him to legal
marriage, would she not lower herself in his estimation, and make the
endurance of his love less probable? Barfoot was not a man to accept
with genuine satisfaction even the appearance of bondage, and more
likely than not his love of her depended upon the belief that in her he
had found a woman capable of regarding life from his own point of
view--a woman who, when she once, loved, would be scornful of the
formalities clung to by feeble minds. He would yield to her if she
demanded forms, but afterwards--when passion had subsided--.

A week had been none too long to ponder these considerations by
themselves; but they were complicated with doubts of a more disturbing
nature. Her mind could not free itself from the thought of Monica. That
Mrs. Widdowson was not always truthful with her husband she had
absolute proof; whether that supported her fear of an intimacy between
Monica and Everard she was unable to determine. The grounds of
suspicion seemed to her very grave; so grave, that during her first day
or two in Cumberland she had all but renounced the hopes long secretly
fostered. She knew herself well enough to understand how jealousy might
wreck her life--even if it were only retrospective. If she married
Barfoot (forms or none--that question in no way touched this other),
she would demand of him a flawless faith. Her pride revolted against
the thought of possessing only a share in his devotion; the moment that
any faithlessness came to her knowledge she would leave him, perforce,
inevitably--and what miseries were then before her!

Was flawless faith possible to Everard Barfoot? His cousin would
ridicule the hope of any such thing--or so Rhoda believed. A
conventional woman would of course see the completest evidence of his
untrustworthiness in his dislike of legal marriage; but Rhoda knew the
idleness of this argument. If love did not hold him, assuredly the
forms of marriage could be no restraint upon Everard; married ten times
over, he would still deem himself absolutely free from any obligation
save that of love. Yet how did he think of that obligation? He might
hold it perfectly compatible with the indulgence of casual impulse. And
this (which she suspected to be the view of every man) Rhoda had no
power of tolerating. It must be all or nothing, whole faith or none
whatever.

* * *

In the afternoon she suffered from impatient expectancy. If Barfoot
came to-day--she imagined him somewhere in the neighbourhood,
approaching Seascale as the time of his appointment drew near--would he
call at her lodgings? The address she had not given him, but doubtless
he had obtained it from his cousin. Perhaps he would prefer to meet her
unexpectedly--not a difficult thing in this little place, with its
handful of residents and visitors. Certain it was she desired his
arrival. Her heart leapt with joy in the thought that this very evening
might bring him. She wished to study him under new conditions,
and--possibly--to talk with him even more frankly than ever yet, for
there would be opportunity enough.

