About six o'clock a train coming from the south stopped at the station,
which was visible from Rhoda's sitting-room window. She had been
waiting for this moment. She could not go to the station, and did not
venture even to wait anywhere in sight of the exit. Whether any
passenger had alighted must remain uncertain. If Everard had arrived by
this train, doubtless he would go to the hotel, which stood only a few
yards from the line. He would take a meal and presently come forth.

Having allowed half an hour to elapse, she dressed and walked
shoreward. Seascale has no street, no shops; only two or three short
rows of houses irregularly placed on the rising ground above the beach.
To cross the intervening railway, Rhoda could either pass through the
little station, in which case she would also pass the hotel and be
observable from its chief windows, or descend by a longer road which
led under a bridge, and in this way avoid the hotel altogether. She
took the former route. On the sands were a few scattered people, and
some children subdued to Sunday decorum. The tide was rising. She went
down to the nearest tract of hard sand, and stood there for a long
time, a soft western breeze playing upon her face.

If Barfoot were here he would now be coming out to look for her. From a
distance he might not recognize her figure, clad as she was in a
costume such as he had never seen her wearing. She might venture now to
walk up towards the dry, white sandheaps, where the little convolvulus
grew in abundance, and other flowers of which she neither knew nor
cared to learn the names. Scarcely had she turned when she saw Everard
approaching, still far off, but unmistakable. He signalled by taking
off his hat, and quickly was beside her.

'Did you know me before I happened to look round?' she asked laughingly.

'Of course I did. Up there by the station I caught sight of you. Who
else bears herself as you do--with splendid disdain of common mortals?'

'Please don't make me think that my movements are ridiculous.'

'They are superb. The sea has already touched your cheeks. But I am
afraid you have had abominable weather.'

'Yes, rather bad; but there's hope to-day. Where do you come from?'

'By train, only from Carnforth. I left London yesterday morning, and
stopped at Morecambe--some people I know are there. As trains were
awkward to-day, I drove from Morecambe to Carnforth. Did you expect me?'

'I thought you might come, as you spoke of it.'

'How I have got through the week I couldn't tell you. I should have
been here days ago, but I was afraid. Let us go nearer to the sea. I
was afraid of making you angry.'

'It's better to keep one's word.'

'Of course it is. And I am all the more delighted to be with you for
the miserable week of waiting. Have you bathed?'

'Once or twice.'

'I had a swim this morning before breakfast, in pouring rain. Now _you_
can't swim.'

'No. I can't. But why were you sure about it?'

'Only because it's so rare for any girl to learn swimming. A man who
can't swim is only half the man he might be, and to a woman I should
think it must be of even more benefit. As in everything else, women are
trammelled by their clothes; to be able to get rid of them, and to move
about with free and brave exertion of all the body, must tend to every
kind of health, physical, mental, and mortal.'

'Yes, I quite believe that,' said Rhoda, gazing at the sea.

'I spoke rather exultantly, didn't I? I like to feel myself superior to
you in some things. You have so often pointed out to me what a paltry,
ineffectual creature I am.'

'I don't remember ever using those words, or implying them.'

'How does the day stand with you?' asked Everard in the tone of perfect
comradeship. 'Have you still to dine?'

'My dining is a very simple matter; it happens at one o'clock. About
nine I shall have supper.'

'Let us walk a little then. And may I smoke?'

'Why not?'

Everard lit a cigar, and, as the tide drove them back, they moved
eventually to the higher ground, whence there was a fine view of the
mountains, rich in evening colours.

'To-morrow you leave here?'

'Yes,' Rhoda answered. 'I shall go by railway to Coniston, and walk
from there towards Helvellyn, as you suggested.'

'I have something else to propose. A man I talked to in the train told
me of a fine walk in this neighbourhood. From Ravenglass, just below
here, there's a little line runs up Eskdale to a terminus at the foot
of Scawfell, a place called Boot. From Boot one can walk either over
the top of Scawfell or by a lower track to Wastdale Head. It's very
grand, wild country, especially the last part, the going down to
Wastwater, and not many miles in all. Suppose we have that walk
to-morrow? From Wastdale we could drive back to Seascale in the
evening, and then the next day--just as you like.'

'Are you quite sure about the distances?'

'Quite. I have the Ordnance map in my pocket. Let me show you.'

He spread the map on the top of a wall, and they stood side by side
inspecting it.

'We must take something to eat; I'll provide for that. And at the
Wastdale Head hotel we can have dinner--about three or four, probably.
It would be enjoyable, wouldn't it?'

'If it doesn't rain.'

'We'll hope it won't. As we go back we can look out the trains at the
station. No doubt there's one soon after breakfast.'

Their rambling, with talk in a strain of easy friendliness, brought
them back to Seascale half an hour after sunset, which was of a kind
that seemed to promise well for the morrow.

'Won't you come out again after supper?' Barfoot asked.

'Not again to-night.'

'For a quarter of an hour,' he urged. 'Just down to the sea and back.'

'I have been walking all day. I shall be glad to rest and read.'

'Very well. To-morrow morning.'

Having discovered the train which would take them to Ravenglass, and
connect with one on the Eskdale line, they agreed to meet at the
station. Barfoot was to bring with him such refreshment as would be
necessary.

Their hopes for the weather had complete fulfilment. The only fear was
lest the sun's heat might be oppressive, but this anxiety could be
cheerfully borne. Slung over his shoulders Barfoot had a small
forage-bag, which gave him matter for talk on the railway journey; it
had been his companion in many parts of the world, and had held strange
kinds of food.

The journey up Eskdale, from Ravenglass to Boot, is by a miniature
railway, with the oddest little engine and a carriage or two of
primitive simplicity. At each station on the upward winding
track--stations represented only by a wooden shed like a
tool-house--the guard jumps down and acts as booking-clerk, if
passengers there be desirous of booking. In a few miles the scenery
changes from beauty to grandeur, and at the terminus no further
steaming would be possible, for the great flank of Scawfell bars the
way.

Everard and his companion began their climb through the pretty
straggling village of Boot. A mountain torrent roared by the wayside,
and the course they had marked upon the map showed that they must
follow this stream for some miles up to the tarn where it originated.
Houses, human beings, and even trodden paths they soon left behind,
coming out on to a vast moorland, with hill summits near and far.
Scawfell they could not hope to ascend; with the walk that lay before
them it was enough to make a way over one of his huge shoulders.

'If your strength fails,' said Everard merrily, when for an hour they
had been plodding through grey solitudes, 'there is no human help. I
should have to choose between carrying you back to Boot or on to
Wastdale.'

'My strength is not likely to fail sooner than yours,' was the laughing
reply.

'I have chicken sandwiches, and wine that maketh glad the heart of man.
Tell me when hunger overcomes you. I should think we had better make
our halt at Burmoor Tarn.'

That, indeed, proved to be the convenient resting-place. A wild spot, a
hollow amid the rolling expanse of moorland, its little lake of black
water glistening under the midday sun. And here stood a shepherd's
cottage, the only habitation they had seen since leaving Boot. Somewhat
uncertain about the course to be henceforth followed, they made inquiry
at this cottage, and a woman who appeared to be quite alone gave them
the needful direction. Thus at ease in mind they crossed the bridge at
the foot of the tarn, and just beyond it found a spot suitable for
repose. Everard brought forth his sandwiches and his flask of wine,
moreover a wine-glass, which was for Rhoda's use. They ate and drank
festively.

'Now this is just what I have enjoyed in imagination for a year or
more,' said Barfoot, when the luncheon was over, and he lay propped
upon his elbow, gazing at Rhoda's fine eyes and her sun-warmed cheeks.
'An ideal realized, for once in one's life. A perfect moment.'

'Don't you like the scent of burning peat from that cottage?'

'Yes. I like everything about us, in heaven and earth, and most of all
I like your companionship, Rhoda.'

She could not resent this first use of her Christian name; it was so
natural, so inevitable; yet she moved her head as if with a slight
annoyance.

'Is mine as agreeable to you?' he added, stroking the back of her hand
with a spray of heather. 'Or do you just tolerate me out of
good-nature?'

'I have liked your companionship all the way from Seascale. Don't
disturb my enjoyment of it for the rest of the way.'

'That would be a misfortune indeed. The whole day shall be perfect. Not
a note of discord. But I must have liberty to say what comes into my
mind, and when you don't choose to answer I shall respect your silence.'

'Wouldn't you like to smoke a cigar before we start again?'

'Yes. But I like still better not to. The scent of peat is pleasanter
to you than that of tobacco.'

'Oblige me by lighting the cigar.'

'If you command--' He did her bidding. 'The whole day shall be perfect.
A delightful dinner at the inn, a drive to Seascale, an hour or two of
rest, and then one more quiet talk by the sea at nightfall.'

'All but the last. I shall be too tired.'

'No. I must have that hour of talk by the sea. You are free to answer
me or not, but your presence you must grant me. We are in an ideal
world remember. We care nothing for all the sons and daughters of men.
You and I will spend this one day together between cloudless heaven and
silent earth--a memory for lifetime. At nightfall you will come out
again, and meet me down by the sea, where you stood when I first saw
you yesterday.'

Rhoda made no reply. She looked away from him at the black, deep water.

'What an opportunity,' he went on, raising his hand to point at the
cottage, 'for saying the silliest of conceivable things!'

'What _might_ that be, I wonder?'

'Why, that to dwell there together for the rest of our lives would be
supreme felicity. You know the kind of man that would say that.'

'Not personally, thank goodness!'

'A week--a month, even--with weather such as this. Nay, with a storm
for variety; clouds from the top of Scawfell falling thick about us; a
fierce wind shrieking across the tarn; sheets and torrents and floods
of rain beating upon our roof; and you and I by the peat-fire. With a
good supply of books, old and new, I can picture it for three months,
for half a year!'

'Be on your guard. Remember "that kind of man".'

'I am in no danger. There is a vast difference between six months and
all one's life. When the half-year was over we would leave England.'

'By the Orient Express?'

They laughed together, Rhoda colouring, for the words that had escaped
her meant too much for mere jest.

'By the Orient Express. We would have a house by the Bosphorus for the
next half-year, and contrast our emotions with those we had known by
Burmoor Tarn. Think what a rich year of life that would make! How much
we should have learnt from nature and from each other!'

'And how dreadfully tired of each other we should be!'

Barfoot looked keenly at her. He could not with certainty read her
countenance.

'You mean that?' he asked.

'You know it is true.'

'Hush! The day is to be perfect. I won't admit that we could ever tire
of each other with reasonable variety of circumstance. You to me are
infinitely interesting, and I believe that I might become so to you.'

He did not allow himself to vary from this tone of fanciful
speculation, suited to the idle hour. Rhoda said very little; her
remarks were generally a purposed interruption of Everard's theme. When
the cigar was smoked Out they rose and set forward again. This latter
half of their walk proved the most interesting, for they were expectant
of the view down upon Wastdale. A bold summit came in sight, dark,
desolate, which they judged to be Great Gabel; and when they had
pressed on eagerly for another mile, the valley opened beneath them
with such striking suddenness that they stopped on the instant and
glanced at each other in silence. From a noble height they looked down
upon Wastwater, sternest and blackest of the lakes, on the fields and
copses of the valley head with its winding stream, and the rugged
gorges which lie beyond in mountain shadow.

The descent was by a path which in winter becomes the bed of a torrent,
steep and stony, zigzagging through a thick wood. Here, and when they
had reached the level road leading into the village, their talk was in
the same natural, light-hearted strain as before they rested. So at the
inn where they dined, and during their drive homewards--by the dark
lake with its woods and precipices, out into the country of green
hills, and thence through Gosforth on the long road descending seaward.
Since their early departure scarcely a cloud had passed over the sun--a
perfect day.

They alighted before reaching Seascale. Barfoot discharged his debt to
the driver--who went on to bait at the hotel--and walked with Rhoda for
the last quarter of a mile. This was his own idea; Rhoda made no
remark, but approved his discretion.

'It is six o'clock,' said Everard, after a short silence. 'You remember
your arrangement. At eight, down on the shore.'

'I should be much more comfortable in the armchair with a book.'

'Oh, you have had enough of books. It's time to live.'

'It's time to rest.'

'Are you so very tired? Poor girl! The day has been rather too much for
you.'

Rhoda laughed.

'I could walk back again to Wastwater if it were necessary.'

'Of course; I knew that. You are magnificent. At eight o'clock then--'

Nothing more was said on the subject. When in sight of Rhoda's lodgings
they parted without hand-shaking.

Before eight Everard was straying about the beach, watching the sun go
down in splendour. He smiled to himself frequently. The hour had come
for his last trial of Rhoda, and he felt some confidence as to the
result. If her mettle endured his test, if she declared herself willing
not only to abandon her avowed ideal of life, but to defy the world's
opinion by becoming his wife without forms of mutual bondage--she was
the woman he had imagined, and by her side he would go cheerfully on
his way as a married man. Legally married; the proposal of free union
was to be a test only. Loving her as he had never thought to love,
there still remained with him so much of the temper in which he first
wooed her that he could be satisfied with nothing short of
unconditional surrender. Delighting in her independence of mind, he
still desired to see her in complete subjugation to him, to inspire her
with unreflecting passion. Tame consent to matrimony was an everyday
experience. Agnes Brissenden, he felt sure, would marry him whenever he
chose to ask her--and would make one of the best wives conceivable. But
of Rhoda Nunn he expected and demanded more than this. She must rise
far above the level of ordinary intelligent women. She must manifest an
absolute confidence in him--that was the true significance of his
present motives. The censures and suspicions which she had not scrupled
to confess in plain words must linger in no corner of her mind.

His heart throbbed with impatience for her coming. Come she would; it
was not in Rhoda's nature to play tricks; if she had not meant to meet
him she would have said so resolutely, as last night.

At a few minutes past the hour he looked landward, and saw her figure
against the golden sky. She came down from the sandbank very slowly,
with careless, loitering steps. He moved but a little way to meet her,
and then stood still. He had done his part; it was now hers to forego
female privileges, to obey the constraint of love. The western
afterglow touched her features, heightening the beauty Everard had
learnt to see in them. Still she loitered, stooping to pick up a piece
of seaweed; but still he kept his place, motionless, and she came
nearer.

'Did you see the light of sunset on the mountains?'

'Yes,' he replied.

'There has been no such evening since I came.'

'And you wanted to sit at home with a book. That was no close for a
perfect day.'

'I found a letter from your cousin. She was with her friends the
Goodalls yesterday.'

'The Goodalls--I used to know them.'

'Yes.'

The word was uttered with significance. Everard understood the
allusion, but did not care to show that he did.

'How does Mary get on without you?'

'There's no difficulty.'

'Has she any one capable of taking your place?'

'Yes. Miss Vesper can do all that's necessary.'

'Even to inspiring the girls with zeal for an independent life?'

'Perhaps even that.'

They went along by the waves, in the warm-coloured twilight, until the
houses of Seascale were hidden. Then Everard stopped.

'To-morrow we go to Coniston?' he said, smiling as he stood before her.

'You are going?'

'Do you think I can leave you?'

Rhoda's eyes fell. She held the long strip of seaweed with both hands
and tightened it.

'Do you _wish_ me to leave you?' he added.

'You mean that we are to go through the lakes together--as we have been
to-day?'

'No. I don't mean that.'

Rhoda took a few steps onward, so that he remained standing behind.
Another moment and his arms had folded about her, his lips were on
hers. She did not resist. His embrace grew stronger, and he pressed
kiss after kiss upon her mouth. With exquisite delight he saw the deep
crimson flush that transfigured her countenance; saw her look for one
instant into his eyes, and was conscious of the triumphant gleam she
met there.

'Do you remember my saying in the letter how I hungered to taste your
lips? I don't know how I have refrained so long--'

'What is your love worth?' asked Rhoda, speaking with a great effort.
She had dropped the seaweed, and one of her hands rested upon his
shoulder, with a slight repelling pressure.

'Worth your whole life!' he answered, with a low, glad laugh.

'That is what I doubt. Convince me of that.'

'Convince you? With more kisses? But what is _your_ love worth?'

'Perhaps more than you yet understand. Perhaps more than you _can_
understand.'

'I will believe that, Rhoda. I know, at all events, that it is
something of inestimable price. The knowledge has grown in me for a
year and more.'

'Let me stand away from you again. There is something more to be said
before--No, let me be quite apart from you.'

He released her after one more kiss.

'Will you answer me a question with perfect truthfulness?'

Her voice was not quite steady, but she succeeded in looking at him
with unflinching eyes.

'Yes. I will answer you _any_ question.'

'That is spoken like a man. Tell me then--is there at this moment any
woman living who has a claim upon you--a moral claim?'

'No such woman exists.'

'But--do we speak the same language?'

'Surely,' he answered with great earnestness. 'There is no woman to
whom I am bound by any kind of obligation.'

A long wave rolled up, broke, and retreated, whilst Rhoda stood in
silent uncertainty.

'I must put the question in another way. During the past month--the
past three months--have you made profession of love--have you even
pretended love--to any woman?'

'To no woman whatever,' he answered firmly.

'That satisfies me.'

'If I knew what is in your mind!' exclaimed Everard, laughing. 'What
sort of life have you imagined for me? Is this the result of Mary's
talk?'

'Not immediately.'

'Still, she planted the suspicion. Believe me, you have been altogether
mistaken. I never was the kind of man Mary thought me. Some day you
shall understand more about it--in the meantime my word must be enough.
I have no thought of love for any woman but you. Did I frighten you
with those joking confessions in my letters? I wrote them purposely--as
you must have seen. The mean, paltry jealousies of women such as one
meets every day are so hateful to me. They argue such a lack of brains.
If I were so unfortunate as to love a woman who looked sour when I
praised a beautiful face. I would snap the bond between us like a bit
of thread. But you are not one of those poor creatures.'

He looked at her with some gravity.

'Should you think me a poor creature if I resented any kind of
unfaithfulness?--whether love, in any noble sense, had part in it or
not?'

'No. That is the reasonable understanding between man and wife. If I
exact fidelity from you, and certainly I should, I must consider myself
under the same obligation.'

'You say "man or wife." Do you say it with the ordinary meaning?'

'Not as it applies to us. You know what I mean when I ask you to be my
wife. If we cannot trust each other without legal bonds, any union
between us would be unjustified.'

Suppressing the agitation which he felt, he awaited her answer. They
could still read each other's faces perfectly in a pale yellow light
from across the sea. Rhoda's manifested an intense conflict.

'After all, you doubt of your love for me?' said Barfoot quietly.

That was not her doubt. She loved with passion, allowing herself to
indulge the luxurious emotion as never yet. She longed once more to
feel his arms about her. But even thus she could consider the vast
issues of the step to which she was urged. The temptation to yield was
very strong, for it seemed to her an easier and a nobler thing to
proclaim her emancipation from social statutes than to announce before
her friends the simple news that she was about to marry. That
announcement would excite something more than surprise. Mary Barfoot
could not but smile with gentle irony; other women would laugh among
themselves; the girls would feel a shock, as at the fall of one who had
made heroic pretences. A sure way of averting this ridicule was by
furnishing occasion for much graver astonishment. If it became known
that she had taken a step such as few women would have dared to
take--deliberately setting an example of new liberty--her position in
the eyes of all who knew her remained one of proud independence.
Rhoda's character was specially exposed to the temptation of such a
motive. For months this argument had been in her mind, again and again
she decided that the sensational step was preferable to a commonplace
renunciation of all she had so vehemently preached. And now that the
moment of actual choice had come she felt able to dare everything--as
far as the danger concerned herself; but she perceived more strongly
than hitherto that not only her own future was involved. How would such
practical heresy affect Everard's position?

She uttered this thought.

'Are you willing, for the sake of this idea, to abandon all society but
that of the very few people who would approve or tolerate what you have
done?'

'I look upon the thing in this way. We are not called upon to declare
our principles wherever we go. If we regard each other as married, why,
we _are_ married. I am no Quixote, hoping to convert the world. It is
between you and me--our own sense of what is reasonable and dignified.'

'But you would not make it a mere deception?'

'Mary would of course be told, and any one else you like.'

She believed him entirely serious. Another woman might have suspected
that he was merely trying her courage, either to assure himself of her
love or to gratify his vanity. But Rhoda's idealism enabled her to take
him literally. She herself had for years maintained an exaggerated
standard of duty and merit; desirous of seeing Everard in a nobler
light than hitherto, she endeavoured to regard his scruple against
formal wedlock as worthy of all respect.

'I can't answer you at once,' she said, half turning away.

'You must. Here and at once.'

The one word of assent would have satisfied him. This he obstinately
required. He believed that it would confirm his love beyond any other
satisfaction she could render him. He must be able to regard her as
magnanimous, a woman who had proved herself worth living or dying for.
And he must have the joy of subduing her to his will.

'No,' said Rhoda firmly. 'I can't answer you tonight. I can't decide so
suddenly.'

This was disingenuous, and she felt humiliated by her subterfuge.
Anything but a sudden decision was asked of her. Before leaving Chelsea
she had 'foreseen this moment, and had made preparations for the
possibility of never returning to Miss Barfoot's house--knowing the
nature of the proposal that would be offered to her. But the practical
resolve needed a greater effort than she had imagined. Above all, she
feared an ignominious failure of purpose after her word was given;
_that_ would belittle her in Everard's eyes, and so shame her in her
own that all hope of happiness in marriage must be at an end.

'You are still doubtful of me, Rhoda?'

He took her hand, and again drew her close. But she refused her lips.

'Or are you doubtful of your own love?'

'No. If I understand what love means, I love you.'

'Then give me the kiss I am waiting for. You have not kissed me yet.'

'I can't--until I am sure of myself--of my readiness--'

Her broken words betrayed the passion with which she was struggling.
Everard felt her tremble against his side.

'Give me your hand,' he whispered. 'The left hand.'

Before she could guess his purpose he had slipped a ring upon her
finger, a marriage ring. Rhoda started away from him, and at once drew
off the perilous symbol.

'No--that proves to me I can't! What should we gain? You see, you dare
not be quite consistent. It's only deceiving the people who don't know
us.'

'But I have explained to you. The consistency is in ourselves, our own
minds--'

'Take it back. Custom is too strong for us. We should only play at
defying it. Take it back--or I shall drop it on the sand.'

Profoundly mortified, Everard restored the gold circlet to its
hiding-place and stood gazing at the dim horizon. Some moments passed,
then he heard his name murmured. He did not look round.

'Everard, dearest--'

Was that Rhoda's voice, so low, tender, caressing? It thrilled him, and
with a silent laugh of scorn at his own folly, he turned to her, every
thought burnt up in passion.

'Will you kiss me?'

For an answer she laid her hands on his shoulders and gazed at him.
Barfoot understood. He smiled constrainedly, and said in a low voice,--

'You wish for that old, idle form--?'

'Not the religious form, which has no meaning for either of us, But--'

'You have been living here seven or eight days. Stay till the
fifteenth, then we can get a licence from the registrar of the
district. Does that please you?'

Her eyes made reply.

'Do you love me any the less, Everard?'

'Kiss me.'

She did, and consciousness was lost for them as their mouths clung
together and their hearts throbbed like one.

'Isn't it better?' Rhoda asked, as they walked back in the darkness.
'Won't it make our life so much simpler and happier?'

'Perhaps.'

'You know it will.' She laughed joyously, trying to meet his look.

'Perhaps you are right.'

'I shall let no one hear of it until--. Then let us go abroad.'

'You dare not face Mary?'

'I dare, if you wish it. Of course she will laugh at me. They will all
laugh at me.'

'Why, you may laugh as well.'

'But you have spoilt my life, you know. Such a grand life it might have
been. Why did you come and interfere with me? And you have been so
terribly obstinate.'

'Of course; that's my nature. But after all I have been weak.'

'Yielding in one point that didn't matter to you at all? It was the
only way of making sure that you loved me.'

Barfoot laughed slightingly.

'And what if I needed the other proof that you loved _me_.'




CHAPTER XXVI

THE UNIDEAL TESTED


And neither was content.

Barfoot, over his cigar and glass of whisky at the hotel, fell into a
mood of chagrin. The woman he loved would be his, and there was matter
enough for ardent imagination in the indulgence of that thought; but
his temper disturbed him. After all, he had not triumphed. As usual the
woman had her way. She played upon his senses, and made him her
obedient slave. To prolong the conflict would have availed nothing;
Rhoda, doubtless, was in part actuated by the desire to conquer, and
she knew her power over him. So it was a mere repetition of the old
story--a marriage like any other. And how would it result?

She had great qualities; but was there not much in her that he must
subdue, reform, if they were really to spend their lives together? Her
energy of domination perhaps excelled his. Such a woman might be unable
to concede him the liberty in marriage which theoretically she granted
to be just. Perhaps she would torment him with restless jealousies,
suspecting on every trivial occasion an infringement of her right. From
that point of view it would have been far wiser to persist in rejecting
legal marriage, that her dependence upon him might be more complete.
Later, if all went well, the concession could have been made--if, for
instance, she became a mother. But then returned the exasperating
thought that Rhoda had overcome his will. Was not that a beginning of
evil augury?

To be sure, after marriage their relations would be different. He would
not then be at the mercy of his senses. But how miserable to anticipate
a long, perhaps bitter, struggle for predominance. After all, that
could hardly come about. The commencement of any such discord would be
the signal for separation. His wealth assured his freedom. He was not
like the poor devils who must perforce live with an intolerable woman
because they cannot support themselves and their families in different
places. Need he entertain that worst of fears--the dread that his
independence might fail him, subdued by his wife's will?

Free as he boasted himself from lover's silliness, he had magnified
Rhoda's image. She was not the glorious rebel he had pictured. Like any
other woman, she mistrusted her love without the sanction of society.
Well, that was something relinquished, lost. Marriage would after all
be a compromise. He had not found his ideal--though in these days it
assuredly existed.

* * *

And Rhoda, sitting late in the little lodging-house parlour, visited
her soul with questionings no less troublesome. Everard was not
satisfied with her. He had yielded, perhaps more than half
contemptuously, to what he thought a feminine weakness. In going with
her to the registrar's office he would feel himself to be acting an
ignoble part. Was it not a bad beginning to rule him against his
conscience?

She had triumphed splendidly. In the world's eye this marriage of hers
was far better than any she could reasonably have hoped, and her heart
approved it with rapture. At a stage in life when she had sternly
reconciled herself never to know a man's love, this love had sought her
with passionate persistency of which even a beautiful young girl might
feel proud. She had no beauty; she was loved for her mind, her very
self. But must not Everard's conception of her have suffered? In
winning her had he obtained the woman of his desire?

Why was she not more politic? Would it not have been possible to
gratify him, and yet to gain his consent to legal marriage? By first of
all complying she would have seemed to confirm all he believed of her;
and then, his ardour at height, how simple to point out to him--without
entreaty, without show of much concern--that by neglecting formalities
they gained absolutely nothing. Artifice of that kind was perhaps
demanded by the mere circumstances. Possibly he himself would have
welcomed it--after the grateful sense of inspiring such complete
devotion. It is the woman's part to exercise tact; she had proved
herself lamentably deficient in that quality.

To-morrow she must study his manner. If she discerned any serious
change, any grave indication of disappointment--

What was her life to be? At first they would travel together; but
before long it might be necessary to have a settled home, and what then
would be her social position, her duties and pleasures? Housekeeping,
mere domesticities, could never occupy her for more than the smallest
possible part of each day. Having lost one purpose in life, dignified,
absorbing, likely to extend its sphere as time went on, what other
could she hope to substitute for it?

Love of husband--perhaps of child. There must be more than that. Rhoda
did not deceive herself as to the requirements of her nature. Practical
activity in some intellectual undertaking; a share--nay, leadership--in
some "movement;" contact with the revolutionary life of her time--the
impulses of her heart once satisfied, these things would again claim
her. But how if Everard resisted such tendencies? Was he in truth
capable of respecting her individuality? Or would his strong instinct
of lordship urge him to direct his wife as a dependent, to impose upon
her his own view of things? She doubted whether he had much genuine
sympathy with woman's emancipation as she understood it. Yet in no
particular had her convictions changed; nor would they change. She
herself was no longer one of the 'odd women'; fortune had--or seemed to
have--been kind to her; none the less her sense of a mission remained.
No longer an example of perfect female independence, and unable
therefore to use the same language as before, she might illustrate
woman's claim of equality in marriage.--If her experience proved no
obstacle.

* * *

Next morning, as had been agreed, they met at some distance from
Seascale, and spent two or three hours together. There was little
danger in observation unless by a casual peasant; for the most part
their privacy could not have been more secure in a locked chamber. Lest
curiosity should be excited by his making inquiries at the hotel,
Barfoot proposed to walk over to Gosforth, the nearest town, this
afternoon, and learn where the registrar for the locality of Seascale
might be found. By neither was allusion made to their difference of
last evening, but Rhoda distressed herself by imagining a diminished
fervour in her companion; he seemed unusually silent and meditative,
and was content to hold her hand now and then.

'Shall you stay here all the week?' she inquired.

'If you wish me to.'

'You will find it wearisome.'

'Impossible, with you here. But if I run up to London for a day or two
it might be better. There are preparations. We shall go first of all to
my rooms--'

'I would rather not have stayed in London.'

'I thought you might wish to make purchases.'

'Let us go to some other town, and spend a few days there before
leaving England.'

'Very well. Manchester or Birmingham.'

'You speak rather impatiently,' said Rhoda, looking at him with an
uneasy smile. 'Let it be London if you prefer--'

'On no account. It's all indifferent to me so long as we get safely
away together. Every man is impatient of these preliminaries. Yes, in
that case I must of course go up to London. To-morrow, and back on
Saturday?'

A shower of rain caused them some discomfort. Through the afternoon it
still rained at intervals whilst Barfoot was discharging his business
at Gosforth. He was to see Rhoda again at eight o'clock, and as the
time threatened to hang heavily on his hands he returned by a long
detour, reaching the Seascale hotel about half-past six. No sooner had
he entered than there was delivered to him a letter, brought by
messenger an hour or two ago. It surprised him to recognize Rhoda's
writing on the envelope, which seemed to contain at least two sheets of
notepaper. What now? Some whimsey? Agitated and annoyed by the
anticipation of trouble, he went apart and broke the letter open.

First appeared an enclosure--a letter in his cousin Mary's writing. He
turned to the other sheet and read these lines,--

'I send you something that has come by post this afternoon. Please to
bring it with you when you meet me at eight o'clock--if you still care
to do so.'

His face flushed with anger. What contemptible woman's folly was this?
'If you still care to do so'--and written in a hand that shook. If this
was to be his experience of matrimonial engagement--What rubbish had
Mary been communicating?

'My DEAR RHODA,--I have just gone through a very painful scene, and I
feel bound to let you know of it without delay, as it _may_ concern
you. This evening (Monday), when I came home from Great Portland
Street, Emma told me that Mr. Widdowson had called, that he wished to
see me as soon as possible, and would be here again at six o'clock. He
came, and his appearance alarmed me, he was looking so dreadfully ill.
Without preface, he said, "My wife has left me; she has gone to her
sister, and refuses to return." This was astonishing in itself, and I
wondered still more why he should come and tell _me_ about it in so
strange a way. The explanation followed very promptly, and you may
judge how I heard it. Mr. Widdowson said that his wife had been
behaving very badly of late; that he had discovered several falsehoods
she had told him as to her employment during absences from home, in
daytime and evening. Having cause for suspecting the worst, he last
Saturday engaged a private detective to follow Mrs. Widdowson wherever
she went. This man saw her go to the flats in Bayswater where Everard
lives and knock at _his_ door. As no one replied, she went away for a
time and returned, but again found no one at home. This being at once
reported to Mr. Widdowson he asked his wife where she had been that
afternoon. The answer was false; she said she had been here, with me.
Thereupon he lost command of himself, and charged her with infidelity.
She refused to offer any kind of explanation, but denied that she was
guilty and at once left the house. Since, she has utterly refused to
see him. Her sister can only report that Monica is very ill, and that
she charges her husband with accusing her falsely.

'He had come to me, he said, in unspeakable anguish and helplessness,
to ask me whether I had seen anything suspicious in the relations
between Monica and my cousin when they met at this house or elsewhere.
A nice question! Of course I could only reply that it had never even
occurred to me to observe them--that to my knowledge they had met so
rarely--and that I should never have dreamt of suspecting Monica. "Yet
you see she _must_ be guilty," he kept on repeating. I said no, that I
thought her visit _might_ have an innocent significance, though I
couldn't suggest why she had told falsehoods. Then he inquired what I
knew about Everard's present movements. I answered that I had every
reason to think that he was out of town, but didn't know when he went,
or when he might be expected to return. The poor man was grievously
dissatisfied; he looked at me as if I were in a base plot against him.
It was an immense relief when he went away, after begging me to respect
his confidence.

'I write very hurriedly, as you see. That I _ought_ to write is, I
think, clear--though I may be doing lamentable mischief. I cannot
credit this charge against Mrs. Widdowson; there must surely be some
explanation. If you have already left Seascale, no doubt this letter
will be forwarded.--Ever yours, dear Rhoda,

MARY BARFOOT.'

Everard laughed bitterly. The completeness of the case against him in
Rhoda's eyes must be so overwhelming, and his absolute innocence made
it exasperating to have to defend himself. How, indeed, was he to
defend himself?

The story was strange enough. Could he be right in the interpretation
which at once suggested itself to his mind--or perhaps to his vanity?
He remembered the meeting with Mrs. Widdowson near his abode on Friday.
He recollected, moreover, the signs of interest in himself which, as he
now thought, she had shown on previous occasions. Had the poor little
woman--doubtless miserable with her husband--actually let herself fall
in love with him? But, even in that case, what a reckless thing to
do--to come to his rooms! Why, she must have been driven by a despair
that blinded her to all sense of delicacy! Perhaps, had he been at
home, she would have made a pretence of wishing to speak about Rhoda
Nunn. That was imprudent behaviour of his, making such a person his
confidante. But he was tempted by his liking for her.

'By Jove!' he muttered, overcome by the thought. 'I'm glad I was _not_
at home!'

But then--he had told her that he was going away on Saturday. How could
she expect to find him? The hour of her visit was not stated; probably
she hoped to catch him before he left. And was her appearance in the
neighbourhood on Friday--her troubled aspect--to be explained as an
abortive attempt to have a private interview with him?

The queerest affair--and maddening in its issues! Rhoda was raging with
jealousy. Well, he too would rage. And without affectation. It was
strange that he felt almost glad of a ground of quarrel with Rhoda. All
day he had been in an irritable temper, and so far as he could
understand himself it was due to resentment of his last night's defeat.
He though of Rhoda as ardently as ever, but an element that was very
like brutality had intruded into his emotions; that was his reason from
refraining from caresses this morning; he could not trust himself.

He would endure no absurdities. If Rhoda did not choose to accept his
simple assurance--let her take the consequences. Even now, perhaps, he
would bring her to her knees before him. Let her wrong him by baseless
accusation! Then it would no longer be _he_ who sued for favour. He
would whistle her down the wind, and await her penitent reappearance.
Sooner or later his pride and hers, the obstinacy in their natures,
must battle it out; better that it should be now, before the
irrevocable step had been taken.

He ate his dinner with savage appetite, and drank a good deal more wine
than of wont. Then he smoked until the last minute of delay that his
engagement allowed. Of course she had sent the letter to the hotel
because he might be unable to read it in twilight. Wise precaution. And
he was glad to have been able to think the matter over, to work himself
into reasonable wrath. If ever man did well to be angry--!

There she was, down by the edge of the waves. She would not turn to see
if he were coming; he felt sure of that. Whether she heard his
footsteps he could not tell. When quite close to her, he exclaimed,--

'Well, Rhoda?' She must have known of his approach, for she gave no
start.

She faced slowly to him. No trace of tears on her countenance; no,
Rhoda was above that. Gravity of the sternest--that was all.

'Well,' he continued, 'what have you to say to me?'

'I? Nothing.'

'You mean that it is my business to explain what Mary has told you. I
can't, so there's an end of it.'

'What do you mean by that?' she asked in clear, distant tones.

'Precisely what I say, Rhoda. And I am obliged to ask what _you_ mean
by this odd way of speaking to me. What has happened since we parted
this morning?'

Rhoda could not suppress her astonishment; she gazed fixedly at him.

'If you can't explain this letter, who can?'

'I suppose Mrs. Widdowson would be able to account for her doings. I
certainly am not able to. And it seems to me that you are strangely
forgetful of something that passed between us yesterday.'

'Of what?' she asked coldly, her face, which was held proudly up,
turning towards the sea.

'Evidently you accuse me of concealing something from you. Please to
remember a certain plain question you asked me, and the equally plain
answer I gave.'

He detected the beginning of a smile about her rigid lips.

