
Human feeling prompted the listener to declare that she had no doubts
left. Yet she could not give utterance to the words. She knew they
would sound forced, insincere. Shame at inflicting shame caused her to
bend her head. Already she had been silent too long.

'I will tell you everything,' Monica was saying in low, tremulous
tones. 'If no one else believes me, you at all events shall. I have not
done what--'

'No--I can't hear this,' Rhoda broke in, the speaker's voice affecting
her too powerfully. 'I will believe you without this.'

Monica broke into sobbing. The strain of this last effort had overtaxed
her strength.

'We won't talk any more of it,' said Rhoda, with an endeavour to speak
kindly. 'You have done all that could be asked of you. I am grateful to
you for coming on my account.

The other controlled herself.

'Will you hear what I have to say, Miss Nunn? Will you hear it as a
friend? I want to put myself right in your thoughts. I have told no one
else; I shall be easier in mind if you will hear me. My husband will
know everything before very long--but perhaps I shall not be alive--'

Something in Miss Nunn's face suggested to Monica that her meaning was
understood. Perhaps, notwithstanding her denial, Virginia had told more
when she was here than she had permission to make known.

'Why should you wish to tell _me_?' asked Rhoda uneasily.

'Because you are so strong. You will say something that will help me. I
know you think that I have committed a sin which it is a shame to speak
of. That isn't true. If it were true I should never consent to go and
live in my husband's house.'

'You are returning to him?'

'I forgot that I haven't told you.'

And Monica related the agreement that had been arrived at. When she
spoke of the time that must elapse before she would make a confession
to her husband, it again seemed to her that Miss Nunn understood.

'There is a reason why I consent to be supported by him,' she
continued. 'If it were true that I had sinned as he suspects I would
rather kill myself than pretend still to be his wife. The day before he
had me watched I thought I had left him forever. I thought that if I
went back to the house again it would only be to get a few things that
I needed. It was some one who lived in the same building as Mr.
Barfoot. You have met him--'

She raised her eyes for an instant, and they encountered the
listener's. Rhoda was at no loss to supply the omitted name; she saw at
once how plain things were becoming.

'He has left England,' pursued Monica in a hurried but clear voice. 'I
thought then that I should go away with him. But--it was impossible. I
loved him--or thought I loved him; but I was guiltless of anything more
than consenting to leave my husband. Will you believe me?'

'Yes, Monica, I do believe you.'

'If you have any doubt, I can show you a letter he wrote to me from
abroad, which will prove--'

'I believe you absolutely.'

'But let me tell you more. I must explain how the misunderstanding--'

Rapidly she recounted the incidents of that fatal Saturday afternoon.
At the conclusion her self-command was again overcome; she shed tears,
and murmured broken entreaties for kindness.

'What shall I do, Miss Nunn? How can I live until--? I know it's only
for a short time. My wretched life will soon be at an end--'

'Monica--there is one thing you must remember.'

The voice was so gentle, though firm--so unlike what she had expected
to hear--that the sufferer looked up with grateful attention.

'Tell me--give me what help you can.'

'Life seems so bitter to you that you are in despair. Yet isn't it your
duty to live as though some hope were before you?'

Monica gazed in uncertainty.

'You mean--' she faltered.

'I think you will understand. I am not speaking of your husband.
Whether you have duties to him or not I can't say; that is for your own
mind and heart to determine. But isn't it true that your health has a
graver importance than if you yourself only were concerned?'

'Yes--you have understood me--'

'Isn't it your duty to remember at every moment that your thoughts,
your actions, may affect another life--that by heedlessness, by
abandoning yourself to despair, you may be the cause of suffering it
was in your power to avert?'

Herself strongly moved, Rhoda had never spoken so impressively, had
never given counsel of such earnest significance. She felt her power in
quite a new way, without touch of vanity, without posing or any trivial
self-consciousness. When she least expected it an opportunity had come
for exerting the moral influence on which she prided herself, and which
she hoped to make the ennobling element of her life. All the better
that the case was one calling for courage, for contempt of vulgar
reticences; the combative soul in her became stronger when faced by
such conditions. Seeing that her words were not in vain, she came
nearer to Monica and spoke yet more kindly.

'Why do you encourage that fear of your life coming to an end?'

'It's more a hope than a fear--at most times. I can see nothing before
me. I don't wish to live.'

'That's morbid. It isn't yourself that speaks, but your trouble. You
are young and strong, and in a year's time very much of this
unhappiness will have passed.'

'I have felt it like a certainty--as if it had been foretold to
me--ever since I knew--'

'I think it very likely that young wives have often the same dread. It
is physical, Monica, and in your case there is so little relief from
dark brooding. But again you must think of your responsibility. You
will live, because the poor little life will need your care.'

Monica turned her head away and moaned.

'I shall not love my child.'

'Yes, you will. And that love, that duty, is the life to which you must
look forward. You have suffered a great deal, but after such sorrow as
yours there comes quietness and resignation. Nature will help you.'

'Oh, if you could give me some of _your_ strength! I have never been
able to look at life as you do. I should never have married him if I
hadn't been tempted by the thoughts of living easily--and I feared
so--that I might always be alone--My sisters are so miserable; it
terrified me to think of struggling on through life as they do--'

'Your mistake was in looking only at the weak women. You had other
examples before you--girls like Miss Vesper and Miss Haven, who live
bravely and work hard and are proud of their place in the world. But
it's idle to talk of the past, and just as foolish to speak as if you
were sorrowing without hope. How old are you, Monica?'

'Two-and-twenty.'

'Well, I am two-and-thirty--and I don't call myself old. When you have
reached my age I prophesy you will smile at your despair of ten years
ago. At your age one talks so readily of "wrecked life" and "hopeless
future," and all that kind of thing. My dear girl, you may live to be
one of the most contented and most useful women in England. Your life
isn't wrecked at all--nonsense! You have gone through a storm, that's
true; but more likely than not you will be all the better for it. Don't
talk or think about _sins_; simply make up your mind that you won't be
beaten by trials and hardships. There cannot--can there?--be the least
doubt as to how you ought to live through these next coming months.
Your duty is perfectly clear. Strengthen yourself in body and mind. You
_have_ a mind, which is more than can be said of a great many women.
Think bravely and nobly of yourself! Say to yourself: This and that it
is in me to do, and I will do it!'

Monica bent suddenly forward and took one of her friend's hands, and
clung to it.

'I knew you could say something that would help me. You have a way of
speaking. But it isn't only now. I shall be so far away, and so lonely,
all through the dark winter. Will you write to me?'

'Gladly. And tell you all we are doing.'

Rhoda's voice sank for a moment; her eyes wandered; but she recovered
the air of confidence.

'We seemed to have lost you; but before long you will be one of us
again. I mean, you will be one of the women who are fighting in woman's
cause. You will prove by your life that we can be responsible human
beings--trustworthy, conscious of purpose.'

'Tell me--do you think it right for me to live with my husband when I
can't even regard him as a friend?'

'In that I dare not counsel you. If you _can_ think of him as a friend,
in time to come, surely it will be better. But here you must guide
yourself. You seem to have made a very sensible arrangement, and before
long you will see many things more clearly. Try to recover
health--health; that is what you need. Drink in the air of the Severn
Sea; it will be a cordial to you after this stifling London. Next
summer I shall--I hope I shall be at Cheddar, and then I shall come
over to Clevedon--and we shall laugh and talk as if we had never known
a care.'

'Ah, if that time were come! But you have done me good. I shall try--'

She rose.

'I mustn't forget,' said Rhoda, without looking at her, 'that I owe you
thanks. You have done what you felt was right in spite of all it cost
you; and you have very greatly relieved my mind. Of course it is all a
secret between us. If I make it understood that a doubt is no longer
troubling me I shall never say how it was removed.'

'How I wish I had come before.'

'For your own sake, if I have really helped you, I wish you had. But as
for anything else--it is much better as it is.'

And Rhoda stood with erect head, smiling her smile of liberty. Monica
did not dare to ask any question. She moved up to her friend, holding
out both hands timidly.

'Good-bye!'

'Till next summer.'

They embraced, and kissed each other, Monica, when she had withdrawn
her hot lips, again murmuring words of gratitude. Then in silence they
went together to the house-door, and in silence parted.




CHAPTER XXX

RETREAT WITH HONOUR


Alighting, on his return to London, at the Savoy Hotel, Barfoot
insensibly prolonged his stay there. For the present he had no need of
a more private dwelling; he could not see more than a few days ahead;
his next decisive step was as uncertain as it had been during the first
few months after his coming back from the East.

Meantime, he led a sufficiently agreeable life. The Brissendens were
not in town, but his growing intimacy with that family had extended his
social outlook, and in a direction correspondent with the change in his
own circumstances. He was making friends in the world with which he had
a natural affinity; that of wealthy and cultured people who seek no
prominence, who shrink from contact with the circles known as 'smart,'
who possess their souls in quiet freedom. It is a small class,
especially distinguished by the charm of its women. Everard had not
adapted himself without difficulty to this new atmosphere; from the
first he recognized its soothing and bracing quality, but his
experiences had accustomed him to an air more rudely vigorous; it was
only after those weeks spent abroad in frequent intercourse with the
Brissendens that he came to understand the full extent of his sympathy
with the social principles these men and women represented.

In the houses where his welcome was now assured he met some three of
four women among whom it would have been difficult to assign the
precedence for grace of manner and of mind. These persons were not in
declared revolt against the order of things, religious, ethical, or
social; that is to say, they did not think it worthwhile to identify
themselves with any 'movement'; they were content with the unopposed
right of liberal criticism. They lived placidly; refraining from much
that the larger world enjoined, but never aggressive. Everard admired
them with increasing fervour. With one exception they were married, and
suitably married; that member of the charming group who kept her maiden
freedom was Agnes Brissenden, and it seemed to Barfoot that, if
preference were at all justified, Agnes should receive the palm. His
view of her had greatly changed since the early days of their
acquaintance; in fact, he perceived that till of late he had not known
her at all. His quick assumption that Agnes was at his disposal if he
chose to woo her had been mere fatuity; he misread her perfect
simplicity of demeanour, the unconstraint of her intellectual
sympathies. What might now be her personal attitude to him he felt
altogether uncertain, and the result was a genuine humility such as he
had never known. Nor was it Agnes only that subdued his masculine
self-assertiveness; her sisters in grace had scarcely less dominion
over him; and at times, as he sat conversing in one of these
drawing-rooms, he broke off to marvel at himself, to appreciate the
perfection of his own suavity, the vast advance he had been making in
polished humanism.

Towards the end of November he learnt that the Brissendens were at
their town house, and a week later he received an invitation to dine
with them.

Over his luncheon at the hotel Everard reflected with some gravity,
for, if he were not mistaken, the hour had come when he must make up
his mind on a point too long in suspense. What was Rhoda Nunn doing? He
had heard nothing whatever of her. His cousin Mary wrote to him, whilst
he was at Ostend, in a kind and friendly tone, informing him that his
simple assurance with regard to a certain disagreeable matter was all
she had desired, and hoping that he would come and see her as usual
when he found himself in London. But he had kept away from the house in
Queen's Road, and it was probable that Mary did not even know his
address. As the result of meditation he went to his sitting-room, and
with an air of reluctance sat down to write a letter. It was a request
that Mary would let him see her somewhere or other--not at her house.
Couldn't they have a talk at the place in Great Portland Street, when
no one else was there?

Miss Barfoot answered with brief assent. If he liked to come to Great
Portland Street at three o'clock on Saturday she would be awaiting him.

On arriving, he inspected the rooms with curiosity.

'I have often wished to come here, Mary. Show me over the premises,
will you?'

'That was your purpose--?'

'No, not altogether. But you know how your work interests me.'

Mary complied, and freely answered his various questions. Then they sat
down on hard chairs by the fire, and Everard, leaning forward as if to
warm his hands, lost no more time in coming to the point.

'I want to hear about Miss Nunn.'

'To hear about her? Pray, what do you wish to hear?'

'Is she well?'

'Very well indeed.'

'I'm very glad of that. Does she ever speak of me?'

'Let me see--I don't think she has referred to you lately.'

Everard looked up.

'Don't let us play a comedy, Mary. I want to talk very seriously. Shall
I tell you what happened when I went to Seascale?'

'Ah, you went to Seascale, did you?'

'Didn't you know that?' he asked, unable to decide the question from
his cousin's face, which was quite friendly, but inscrutable.

'You went when Miss Nunn was there?'

'Of course. You must have known I was going, when I asked you for her
Seascale address.'

'And what did happen? I shall be glad to hear--if you feel at liberty
to tell me.'

After a pause, Everard began the narrative. But he did not see fit to
give it with all the detail which Mary had learnt from her friend. He
spoke of the excursion to Wastwater, and of the subsequent meeting on
the shore.

'The end of it was that Miss Nunn consented to marry me.'

'She consented?'

'That comes as a surprise?'

'Please go on.'

'Well, we arranged everything. Rhoda was to stay till the fifteen days
were over, and the marriage would have been there. But then arrived
your letter, and we quarrelled about it. I wasn't disposed to beg and
pray for justice. I told Rhoda that her wish for evidence was an
insult, that I would take no step to understand Mrs. Widdowson's
behaviour. Rhoda was illogical, I think. She did not refuse to take my
word, but she wouldn't marry me until the thing was cleared up. I told
her that she must investigate it for herself, and so we parted in no
very good temper.'

Miss Barfoot smiled and mused. Her duty, she now felt convinced, was to
abstain from any sort of meddling. These two people must settle their
affairs as they chose. To interfere was to incur an enormous
responsibility. For what she had already done in that way Mary reproved
herself.

'Now I want to ask you a plain question,' Everard resumed. 'That letter
you wrote to me at Ostend--did it represent Rhoda's mind as well as
your own?'

'It's quite impossible for me to say. I didn't know Rhoda's mind.'

'Well, perhaps that is a satisfactory answer. It implies, no doubt,
that she was still resolved not to concede the point on which I
insisted. But since then? Has she come to a decision?'

It was necessary to prevaricate. Mary knew of the interview between
Miss Nunn and Mrs. Widdowson, knew its result; but she would not hint
at this.

'I have no means of judging how she regards you, Everard.'

'It is possible she even thinks me a liar?'

'I understood you to say that she never refused to believe you.'

He made a movement of impatience.

'Plainly--you will tell me nothing?'

'I have nothing to tell.'

'Then I suppose I must see Rhoda. Perhaps she will refuse to admit me?'

'I can't say. But if she does her meaning would be unmistakable.'

'Cousin Mary'--he looked at her and laughed--'I think you will be very
glad if she _does_ refuse.'

She seemed about to reply with some pleasantry, but checked herself,
and spoke in a serious voice.

'No. I have no such feeling. Whatever you both agree upon will satisfy
me. So come by all means if you wish. I can have nothing to do with it.
You had better write and ask her if she will see you, I should think.'

Barfoot rose from his seat, and Mary was glad to be released so quickly
from a disagreeable situation. For her own part she had no need to put
indiscreet questions; Everard's manner acquainted her quite
sufficiently with what was going on in his thoughts. However, he had
still something to say.

'You think I have behaved rather badly--let us say, harshly?'

'I am not so foolish as to form any judgment in such a case, cousin
Everard.'

'Speaking as a woman, should you say that Rhoda had reason on her
side--in the first instance?'

'I think,' Mary replied, with reluctance, but deliberately, 'that she
was not unreasonable in wishing to postpone her marriage until she knew
what was to be the result of Mrs. Widdowson's indiscreet behaviour.'

'Well, perhaps she was not,' Everard admitted thoughtfully.

'And what _has_ been the result?'

'I only know that Mrs. Widdowson has left London and gone to live at a
house her husband has taken somewhere in the country.'

'I'm relieved to hear that. By-the-bye, the little lady's "indiscreet
behaviour" is as much a mystery to me as ever.'

'And to me,' Mary replied with an air of indifference.

'Well, then, let us take it for granted that I was rather harsh with
Rhoda. But suppose she still meets me with the remark that things are
just as they were--that nothing has been explained?'

'I can't discuss your relations with Miss Nunn.'

'However, you defend her original action. Be so good as to admit that I
can't go to Mrs. Widdowson and request her to publish a statement that
I have never--'

'I shall admit nothing,' interrupted Miss Barfoot rather tartily. 'I
have advised you to see Miss Nunn--if she is willing. And there's
nothing more to be said.'

'Good. I will write to her.'

* * *

He did so, in the fewest possible words, and received an answer of
equal brevity. In accordance with permission granted, on the Monday
evening he found himself once more in his cousin's drawing-room,
sitting alone, waiting Miss Nunn's appearance. He wondered how she
would present herself, in what costume. Her garb proved to be a plain
dress of blue serge, certainly not calculated for effect; but his eye
at once distinguished the fact that she had arranged her hair as she
wore it when he first knew her, a fashion subsequently abandoned for
one that he thought more becoming.

They shook hands. Externally Barfoot was the more agitated, and his
embarrassment appeared in the awkward words with which he began.

'I had made up my mind never to come until you let me know that I was
tried and acquitted But after all it is better to have reason on one's
side.'

'Much better,' replied Rhoda, with a smile which emphasized her
ambiguity.

She sat down, and he followed her example. Their relative positions
called to mind many a conversation they had held in this room.
Barfoot--he wore evening-dress--settled in the comfortable chair as
though he were an ordinary guest.

'I suppose you would never have written to me?'

'Never,' she answered quietly.

'Because you are too proud, or because the mystery is still a mystery?'

'There is no longer any mystery.'

Everard made a movement of surprise.

'Indeed? You have discovered what it all meant?'

'Yes, I know what it all meant.'

'Can you gratify my not unnatural curiosity?'

'I can say nothing about it, except that I know how the
misunderstanding arose.'

Rhoda was betraying the effort it had cost her to seem so
self-possessed when she entered. Her colour had deepened, and she spoke
hurriedly, unevenly.

'And it didn't occur to you that it would be a kindness, not
inconsistent with your dignity, to make me in some way acquainted with
this fact?'

'I feel no uneasiness on your account.'

Everard laughed.

'Splendidly frank, as of old. You really didn't care in the least how
much I suffered?'

'You misunderstand me. I felt sure that you didn't suffer at all.'

'Ah, I see. You imagined me calm in the assurance that I should some
day be justified.'

'I had every reason for imagining it,' rejoined Rhoda. 'Other wise, you
would have given some sign.'

Of course he had deeply offended her by his persistent silence. He had
intended to do so first of all; and afterwards--had thought it might be
as well. Now that he had got over the difficulty of the meeting he
enjoyed his sense of security. How the interview would end he know not;
but on his side there would be nothing hasty, unconsidered, merely
emotional. Had Rhoda any new revelation of personality within her
resources?--that was the question. If so, he would be pleased to
observe it. If not--why, it was only the end to which he had long ago
looked forward.

'It was not for me to give any sign,' he remarked.

'Yet you have said that it is well to have reason on one's side.'

Perhaps a softer note allowed itself to be detected in these words. In
any case, they were not plainly ironical.

'Admit, then, that an approach was due from me. I have made it. I am
here.'

Rhoda said nothing. Yet she had not an air of expectancy. Her eye was
grave, rather sad, as though for the moment she had forgotten what was
at issue, and had lost herself in remoter thought. Regarding her,
Everard felt a nobility in her countenance which amply justified all he
had ever felt and said. But was there anything more--any new power?

'So we go back,' he pursued, 'to our day at Wastwater. The perfect
day--wasn't it?'

'I shall never wish to forget it,' said Rhoda reflectively.

'And we stand as when we quitted each other that night--do we?'

She glanced at him.

'I think not.'

'Then what is the difference?'

He waited some seconds, and repeated the question before Rhoda answered.

'You are conscious of no difference?' she said.

'Months have lapsed. We are different because we are older. But you
speak as if you were conscious of some greater change.'

'Yes, you are changed noticeably. I thought I knew you; perhaps I did.
Now I should have to learn you all over again. It is difficult, you
see, for me to keep pace with you. Your opportunities are so much
wider.'

This was puzzling. Did it signify mere jealousy, or a profounder view
of things? Her voice had something even of pathos, as though she
uttered a simple thought, without caustic intention.

'I try not to waste my life,' he answered seriously. 'I have made new
acquaintances.'

'Will you tell me about them?'

'Tell me first about yourself. You say you would never have written to
me. That means, I think, that you never loved me. When you found that I
had been wrongly suspected--and you suspected me yourself, say what you
will--if you had loved me, you would have asked forgiveness.'

'I have a like reason for doubting _your_ love. If you had loved me you
could never have waited so long without trying to remove the obstacle
that was between us.'

'It was you who put the obstacle there,' said Everard, smiling.

'No. An unlucky chance did that. Or a lucky one. Who knows?'

He began to think: If this woman had enjoyed the social advantages to
which Agnes Brissenden and those others were doubtless indebted for so
much of their charm, would she not have been their equal, or more? For
the first time he compassionated Rhoda. She was brave, and
circumstances had not been kind to her. At this moment, was she not
contending with herself? Was not her honesty, her dignity, struggling
against the impulses of her heart? Rhoda's love had been worth more
than his, and it would be her one love in life. A fatuous reflection,
perhaps; yet every moment's observation seemed to confirm it.

'Well, now,' he said, 'there's the question which we must decide. If
you incline to think that the chance was fortunate--'

She would not speak.

'We must know each other's mind.'

'Ah, that is so difficult!' Rhoda murmured, just raising her hand and
letting it fall.

'Yes, unless we give each other help. Let us imagine ourselves back at
Seascale, down by the waves. (How cold and grim it must be there
to-night!) I repeat what I said then: Rhoda, will you marry me?'

She looked fixedly at him.

'You didn't say that then.'

'What do the words matter?'

'That was not what you said.'

He watched the agitation of her features, until his gaze seemed to
compel her to move. She stepped towards the fireplace, and moved a
little screen that stood too near the fender.

'Why do you want me to repeat exactly what I said?' Everard asked,
rising and following her.

'You speak of the "perfect day." Didn't the day's perfection end before
there was any word of marriage?'

He looked at her with surprise. She had spoken without turning her face
towards him; it was visible now only by the glow of the fire. Yes, what
she said was true, but a truth which he had neither expected nor
desired to hear. Had the new revelation prepared itself?

'Who first used the word, Rhoda?'

'Yes; I did.'

There was silence. Rhoda stood unmoving, the fire's glow upon her face,
and Barfoot watched her.

'Perhaps,' he said at length, 'I was not quite serious when I--'

She turned sharply upon him, a flash of indignation in her eyes.

'Not quite serious? Yes, I have thought that. And were you quite
serious in _anything_ you said?'

'I loved you,' he answered curtly, answering her steady look.

'Yet wanted to see whether--'

She could not finish the sentence; her throat quivered.

'I loved you, that's all. And I believe I still love you.'

Rhoda turned to the fire again.

'Will you marry me?' he asked, moving a step nearer.

'I think you are "not quite serious".'

'I have asked you twice. I ask for the third time.'

'I won't marry you with the forms of marriage,' Rhoda answered in an
abrupt, harsh tone.

'Now it is you who play with a serious matter.'

'You said we had both changed. I see now that our "perfect day" was
marred by my weakness at the end. If you wish to go back in imagination
to that summer night, restore everything, only let _me_ be what I now
am.'

Everard shook his head.

'Impossible. It must be then or now for both of us.'

'Legal marriage,' she said, glancing at him, 'has acquired some new
sanction for you since then?'

'On the whole, perhaps it has.'

'Naturally. But I shall never marry, so we will speak no more of it.'

As if finally dismissing the subject she walked to the opposite side of
the hearth, and there turned towards her companion with a cold smile.

'In other words, then, you have ceased to love me?'

'Yes, I no longer love you.'

'Yet, if I had been willing to revive that fantastic idealism--as you
thought it--'

She interrupted him sternly.

'What _was_ it?'

'Oh, a kind of idealism undoubtedly. I was so bent on making sure that
you loved me.'

She laughed.

'After all, the perfection of our day was half make-believe. You never
loved me with entire sincerity. And you will never love any woman--even
as well as you loved me.'

'Upon my soul, I believe it, Rhoda. And even now--'

'And even now it is just possible for us to say goodbye with something
like friendliness. But not if you talk longer. Don't let us spoil it;
things are so straight--and clear--'

A threatened sob made her break off, but she recovered herself and
offered him her hand.

* * *

He walked all the way back to his hotel, and the cold, clammy night
restored his equanimity. A fortnight later, sending a Christmas
present, with greetings, to Mr. and Mrs. Micklethwaite, he wrote thus--

'I am about to do my duty--as you put it--that is, to marry. The name
of my future wife is Miss Agnes Brissenden. It will be in March, I
think. But I shall see you before then, and give you a fuller account
of myself.'




CHAPTER XXXI

A NEW BEGINNING


Widdowson tried two or three lodgings; he settled at length in a small
house at Hampstead; occupying two plain rooms. Here, at long intervals,
his friend Newdick came to see him, but no one else. He had brought
with him a selection of solid books from his library, and over these
the greater part of each day was spent. Not that he studied with any
zeal; reading, and of a kind that demanded close attention, was his
only resource against melancholia; he knew not how else to occupy
himself. Adam Smith's classical work, perused with laborious
thoroughness, gave him employment for a couple of months; subsequently
he plodded through all the volumes of Hallam.

His landlady, and the neighbours who were at leisure to observe him
when he went out for his two hours' walk in the afternoon, took him for
an old gentleman of sixty-five or so. He no longer held himself
upright, and when out of doors seldom raised his eyes from the ground;
grey streaks had begun to brindle his hair; his face grew yellower and
more deeply furrowed. Of his personal appearance, even of cleanliness,
he became neglectful, and occasionally it happened that he lay in bed
all through the morning, reading, dozing, or in a state of mental
vacuity.

It was long since he had seen his relative, the sprightly widow; but he
had heard from her. On the point of leaving England for her summer
holiday, Mrs. Luke sent him a few lines, urging him, in the language of
the world, to live more sensibly, and let his wife 'have her head' now
and then; it would be better for both of them. Then followed the time
of woe, and for many weeks he gave no thought to Mrs. Luke. But close
upon the end of the year he received one day a certain society journal,
addressed in a hand he knew to the house at Herne Hill. In it was
discoverable, marked with a red pencil, the following paragraph.

'Among the English who this year elected to take their repose and
recreation at Trouville there was no more brilliant figure than Mrs.
Luke Widdowson. This lady is well known in the _monde_ where one never
_s'ennuie_; where smart people are gathered together, there is the
charming widow sure to be seen. We are able to announce that, before
leaving Trouville, Mrs. Widdowson had consented to a private engagement
with Capt. William Horrocks--no other, indeed, than "Captain Bill," the
universal favourite, so beloved by hostesses as a sure dancing man. By
the lamented death of his father, this best of good fellows has now
become Sir William, and we understand that his marriage will be
celebrated after the proper delays. Our congratulations!'

Subsequently arrived a newspaper with an account of the marriage. Mrs.
Luke was now Lady Horrocks: she had the title desired of her heart.

Another two months went by, and there came a letter--re-addressed, like
the other communications, at the post office--in which the baronet's
wife declared herself anxious to hear of her friends. She found they
had left Herne Hill; if this letter reached him, would not Edmund come
and see her at her house in Wimpole Street?

Misery of solitude, desire for a woman's sympathy and counsel, impelled
him to use this opportunity, little as it seemed to promise. He went to
Wimpole Street and had a very long private talk with Lady Horrocks,
who, in some way he could not understand, had changed from her old
self. She began frivolously, but in rather a dull, make-believe way;
and when she heard that Widdowson had parted from his wife, when a few
vague, miserable words had suggested the domestic drama so familiar to
her observation, she at once grew quiet, sober, sympathetic, as if
really glad to have something serious to talk about.

'Now look here, Edmund. Tell the whole story from the first. You're the
sort of man to make awful blunders in such a case as this. Just tell me
all about it. I'm not a bad sort, you know, and I have troubles of my
own--I don't mind telling you so much. Women make fools of
themselves--well, never mind. Just tell me about the little girl, and
see if we can't square things somehow.'

He had a struggle with himself, but at length narrated everything,
often interrupted by shrewd questions.

'No one writes to you?' the listener finally inquired.

'I am expecting to hear from them,' was Widdowson's answer, as he sat
in the usual position, head hanging forward and hands clasped between
his knees.

'To hear what?'

'I think I shall be sent for.'

'Sent for? To make it up?'

'She is going to give birth to a child.'

Lady Horrocks nodded twice thoughtfully, and with a faint smile.

'How did you find this out?'

'I have known it long enough. Her sister Virginia told me before they
went away. I had a suspicion all at once, and I forced her to tell me.'

'And if you are sent for shall you go?'

Widdowson seemed to mutter an affirmative, and added,--

'I shall hear what she has to tell me, as she promised.'

'Is it--is it possible--?'

The lady's question remained incomplete. Widdowson, though he
understood it, vouchsafed no direct answer. Intense suffering was
manifest in his face, and at length he spoke vehemently.

'Whatever she tells me--how can I believe it? When once a woman has
lied how can she ever again be believed? I can't be sure of anything.'

'All that fibbing,' remarked Lady Horrocks, 'has an unpleasant look. No
denying it. She got entangled somehow. But I think you had better
believe that she pulled up just in time.'

'I have no love for her left,' he went on in a despairing voice. 'It
all perished in those frightful days. I tried hard to think that I
still loved her. I kept writing letters--but they meant nothing--or
they only meant that I was driven half crazy by wretchedness. I had
rather we lived on as we have been doing. It's miserable enough for me,
God knows; but it would be worse to try and behave to her as if I could
forget everything. I know her explanation won't satisfy me. Whatever it
is I shall still suspect her. I don't know that the child is mine. It
may be. Perhaps as it grows up there will be a likeness to help me to
make sure. But what a life! Every paltry trifle will make me uneasy;
and if I discovered any fresh deceit I should do something terrible.
You don't know how near I was--'

He shuddered and hid his face.

'The Othello business won't do,' said Lady Horrocks not unkindly. 'You
couldn't have gone on together, of course; you had to part for a time.
Well, that's all over; take it as something that couldn't be helped.
You were behaving absurdly, you know; I told you plainly; I guessed
there'd be trouble. You oughtn't to have married at all, that's the
fact; it would be better for most of us if we kept out of it. Some
marry for a good reason, some for a bad, and mostly it all comes to the
same in the end. But there, never mind. Pull yourself together, dear
boy. It's all nonsense about not caring for her. Of course you're
eating your heart out for want of her. And I'll tell you what I think:
it's very likely Monica was pulled up just in time by discovering--you
understand?--that she was more your wife than any one else's. Something
tells me that's how it was. Just try to look at it in that way. If the
child lives she'll be different. She has sowed her wild oats--why
shouldn't a woman as well as a man? Go down to Clevedon and forgive
her. You're an honest man, and it isn't every woman--never mind. I
could tell you stories about people--but you wouldn't care to hear
them. Just take things with a laugh--we _all_ have to. Life's as you
take it: all gloom or moderately shiny.'

With much more to the same solacing effect. For the time Widdowson was
perchance a trifle comforted; at all events, he went away with a sense
of gratitude to Lady Horrocks. And when he had left the house he
remembered that not even a civil formality with regard to Sir William
had fallen from his lips. But Sir William's wife, for whatever reason,
had also not once mentioned the baronet's name.

* * *

Only a few days passed before Widdowson received the summons he was
expecting. It came in the form of a telegram, bidding him hasten to his
wife; not a word of news added. At the time of its arrival he was
taking his afternoon walk; this delay made it doubtful whether he could
get to Paddington by six-twenty, the last train which would enable him
to reach Clevedon that night. He managed it, with only two or three
minutes to spare.

Not till he was seated in the railway carriage could he fix his
thoughts on the end of the journey. An inexpressible repugnance then
affected him; he would have welcomed any disaster to the train, any
injury which might prevent his going to Monica at such a time. Often,
in anticipation, the event which was now come to pass had confused and
darkened his mind; he loathed the thought of it. If the child, perhaps
already born, were in truth his, it must be very long before he could
regard it with a shadow of paternal interest; uncertainty, to which he
was condemned, would in all likelihood make it an object of aversion to
him as long as he lived.

He was at Bristol by a quarter past nine, and had to change for a slow
train, which by ten o'clock brought him to Yatton, the little junction
for Clevedon. It was a fine starry night, but extremely cold. For the
few minutes of detention he walked restlessly about the platform. His
chief emotion was now a fear lest all might not go well with Monica.
Whether he could believe what she had to tell him or not, it would be
worse if she were to die before he could hear her exculpation. The
anguish of remorse would seize upon him.

Alone in his compartment, he did not sit down, but stamped backwards
and forwards on the floor, and before the train stopped he jumped out.
No cab was procurable; he left his bag at the station, and hastened
with all speed in the direction that he remembered. But very soon the
crossways had confused him. As he met no one whom he could ask to
direct him, he had to knock at a door. Streaming with perspiration, he
came at length within sight of his own house. A church clock was
striking eleven.

Alice and Virginia were both standing in the hall when the door was
opened; they beckoned him into a room.

'Is it over?' he asked, staring from one to the other with his dazzled
eyes.

'At four this afternoon,' answered Alice, scarce able to articulate. 'A
little girl.'

'She had to have chloroform,' said Virginia, who looked a miserable,
lifeless object, and shook like one in an ague.

'And all's well?'

'We think so--we hope so,' they stammered together.

Alice added that the doctor was to make another call to-night. They had
a good nurse. The infant seemed healthy, but was a very, very little
mite, and had only made its voice heard for a few minutes.

'She knows you sent for me?'

'Yes. And we have something to give you. You were to have this as soon
as you arrived.'

Miss Madden handed him a sealed envelope; then both the sisters drew
away, as if fearing the result of what they had done. Widdowson just
glanced at the unaddressed missive and put it into his pocket.

'I must have something to eat,' he said, wiping his forehead. 'When the
doctor comes I'll see him.'

This visit took place while he was engaged on his supper. On coming
down from the patient the doctor gave him an assurance that things were
progressing 'fairly well'; the morning, probably, would enable him to
speak with yet more confidence. Widdowson had another brief
conversation with the sisters, then bade them good-night, and went to
the room that had been prepared for him. As he closed the door he heard
a thin, faint wail, and stood listening until it ceased; it came from a
room on the floor below.

Having brought himself with an effort to open the envelope he had
received, he found several sheets of notepaper, one of them, remarked
immediately, in a man's writing. At this he first glanced, and the
beginning showed him that it was a love-letter written to Monica. He
threw it aside and took up the other sheets, which contained a long
communication from his wife; it was dated two months ago. In it Monica
recounted to him, with scrupulous truthfulness, the whole story of her
relations with Bevis.

'I only make this confession'--so she concluded--'for the sake of the
poor child that will soon be born. The child is yours, and ought not to
suffer because of what I did. The enclosed letter will prove this to
you, if anything can. For myself I ask nothing. I don't think I shall
