'Do you think so?' returned Emmeline, not displeased. 'I hope I may
use it for her good.'

'So do I. But--well, it comes to this, Mrs. Mumford. She seemed to
hint--though she didn't exactly say so--that you were advising her
to have nothing more to do with me. Of course you don't know me, and
I've no doubt you do what you think the best for her. I should feel
it a kindness if you would just tell me whether you are really
persuading her to think no more about me.'

It was an alarming challenge. Emmeline's fears returned; she half
expected an outbreak of violence. The man was growing very nervous,
and his muscles showed the working of strong emotion.

'I have given her no such advice, Mr. Cobb,' she answered, with an
attempt at calm dignity. 'Miss Derrick's private affairs don't at
all concern me. In such matters as this she is really quite old
enough to judge for herself.'

'That's what _I_ should have said,' remarked Mr. Cobb sturdily. 'I
hope you'll excuse me; I don't wish to make myself offensive. After
what she said to me when we met last, I suppose most men would just
let her go her own way. But--but somehow I can't do that. The thing
is, I can't trust what she says; I don't believe she knows her own
mind. And so long as you tell me that you're not interfering--I
mean, that you don't think it right to set her against me--'

'I assure you, nothing of the kind.'

There was a brief silence, then Cobb's voice again sounded with
blunt emphasis.

'We're neither of us very good-tempered. We've known each other
about a year, and we must have quarrelled about fifty times.'

'Do you think, then,' ventured the hostess, 'that it would ever be
possible for you to live peacefully together?'

'Yes, I do,' was the robust answer. 'It would be a fight for the
upper hand, but I know who'd get it, and after that things would be
all right.'

Emmeline could not restrain a laugh, and her visitor joined in it
with a heartiness which spoke in his favour.

'I promise you, Mr. Cobb, that I will do nothing whatever against
your interests.'

'That's very kind of you, and it's all I wanted to know.'

He stood up. Emmeline, still doubtful how to behave, asked him if he
would call on another day, when Miss Derrick might be at home.

'It's only by chance I was able to get here this afternoon,' he
replied. 'I haven't much time to go running about after her, and
that's where I'm at a disadvantage. I don't know whether there's
anyone else, and I'm not asking you to tell me, if you know. Of
course I have to take my chance; but so long as you don't speak
against me--and she thinks a great deal of your advice--'

'I'm very glad to be assured of that. All I shall do, Mr. Cobb, is
to keep before her mind the duty of behaving straightforwardly.'

'That's the thing! Nobody can ask more than that.'

Emmeline hesitated, but could not dismiss him without shaking hands.
That he did not offer to do so until invited, though he betrayed no
sense of social inferiority, seemed another point in his favour.




CHAPTER IV


Not half an hour after Cobb's departure Louise returned. Emmeline
was surprised to see her back so soon; they met near the railway
station as Mrs. Mumford was on her way to a shop in High Street.

'Isn't it good of me! If I had stayed longer I should have gone home
to quarrel with Cissy; but I struggled against the temptation. Going
to the grocer's? Oh, do let me go with you, and see how you do that
kind of thing. I never gave an order at the grocer's in my life--no,
indeed I never did. Mother and Cissy have always looked after
that. And I want to learn about housekeeping; you promised to teach
me.'

Emmeline made no mention of Mr. Cobb's call until they reached the
house.

'He came here!' Louise exclaimed, reddening. 'What impudence! I
shall at once write and tell him that his behaviour is outrageous.
Am I to be hunted like this?'

Her wrath seemed genuine enough; but she was vehemently eager to
learn all that had passed. Emmeline made a truthful report.

'You're quite sure that was all? Oh, his impertinence! Well, and now
that you've seen him, don't you understand how--how impossible it
is?'

'I shall say nothing more about it, Louise. It isn't my business
to--'

The girl's face threatened a tempest. As Emmeline was moving away,
she rudely obstructed her.

'I insist on you telling me what you think. It was abominable of him
to come when I wasn't at home; and I don't think you ought to have
seen him. You've no right to keep your thoughts to yourself!'

Mrs. Mumford was offended, and showed it.

'I have a perfect right, and I shall do so. Please don't let us
quarrel. You may be fond of it, but I am not.'

Louise went from the room and remained invisible till just before
dinner, when she came down with a grave and rather haughty
countenance. To Mumford's remarks she replied with curt formality;
he, prepared for this state of things, began conversing cheerfully
with his wife, and Miss Derrick kept silence. After dinner, she
passed out into the garden.

'It won't do,' said Mumford. 'The house is upset. I'm afraid we
shall have to get rid of her.'

'If she can't behave herself, I'm afraid we must. It's my fault. I
ought to have known that it would never do.'

At half-past ten, Louise was still sitting out of doors in the dark.
Emmeline, wishing to lock up for the night, went to summon her
troublesome guest.

'Hadn't you better come in?'

'Yes. But I think you are very unkind, Mrs. Mumford.'

'Miss Derrick, I really can't do anything but leave you alone when
you are in such an unpleasant hum our.'

'But that's just what you _oughtn't_ to do. When I'm left alone I
sulk, and that's bad for all of us. If you would just get angry and
give me what I deserve, it would be all over very soon.'

'You are always talking about "nice" people. Nice people don't have
scenes of that kind.'

'No, I suppose not. And I'm very sorry, and if you'll let me beg
your pardon--. There, and we might have made it up hours ago. I
won't ask you to tell me what you think of Mr. Cobb. I've written
him the kind of letter his impudence deserves.'

'Very well. We won't talk of it any more. And if you _could_ be a
little quieter in your manners, Louise--'

'I will, I promise I will! Let me say good-night to Mr. Mumford.'

For a day or two there was halcyon weather. On Saturday afternoon
Louise hired a carriage and took her friends for a drive into the
country; at her special request the child accompanied them. Nothing
could have been more delightful. She had quite made up her mind to
have a house, some day, at Sutton. She hoped the Mumfords would
"always" live there, that they might perpetually enjoy each other's
society. What were the rents? she inquired. Well, to begin with, she
would be content with one of the smaller houses; a modest,
semidetached little place, like those at the far end of Cedar Road.
They were perfectly respectable--were they not? How this change in
her station was to come about Louise offered no hint, and did not
seem to think of the matter.

Then restlessness again came upon her. One day she all but declared
her disappointment that the Mumfords saw so few people. Emmeline,
repeating this to her husband, avowed a certain compunction.

'I almost feel that I deliberately misled her. You know, Clarence,
in our first conversation I mentioned the Kirby Simpsons and Mrs.
Hollings, and I feel sure she remembers. It wouldn't be nice to be
taking her money on false pretences, would it?'

'Oh, don't trouble. It's quite certain she has someone in mind whom
she means to marry before long.'

'I can't help thinking that. But I don't know who it can be. She had
a letter this morning in a man's writing, and didn't speak of it. It
wasn't Mr. Cobb.'

Louise, next day, put a point-blank question.

'Didn't you say that you knew some people at West Kensington?'

'Oh, yes,' answered Emmeline, carelessly. 'The Kirby Simpsons.
They're away from home.'

'I'm sorry for that. Isn't there anyone else we could go and see, or
ask over here?'

'I think it very likely Mr. Bilton will come down in a few days.'

Louise received Mr. Bilton's name with moderate interest. But she
dropped the subject, and seemed to reconcile herself to domestic
pleasures.

It was on the evening of this day that Emmeline received a letter
which gave her much annoyance. Her sister, Mrs. Grove, wrote thus:

'How news does get about! And what ridiculous forms it takes! Here
is Mrs. Powell writing to me from Birmingham, and she says she has
heard that you have taken in the daughter of some wealthy _parvenu_,
for a consideration, to train her in the ways of decent society!
Just the kind of thing Mrs. Powell would delight in talking about--she
is so very malicious. Where she got her information I can't
imagine. She doesn't give the slightest hint. "They tell me"--I copy
her words--"that the girl is all but a savage, and does and says the
most awful things. I quite admire Mrs. Mumford's courage. I've heard
of people doing this kind of thing, and I always wondered how they
got on with their friends." Of course I have written to contradict
this rubbish. But it's very annoying, I'm sure.'

Mumford was angry. The source of these fables must be either Bilton
or Dunnill, yet he had not thought either of them the kind of men to
make mischief. Who else knew anything of the affair? Searching her
memory, Emmeline recalled a person unknown to her, a married lady,
who had dropped in at Mrs. Grove's when she and Louise were there.

'I didn't like her--a supercilious sort of person. And she talked a
great deal of her acquaintance with important people. It's far more
likely to have come from her than from either of those men. I shall
write and tell Molly so.'

They began to feel uncomfortable, and seriously thought of getting
rid of the burden so imprudently undertaken. Louise, the next day,
wanted to take Emmeline to town, and showed dissatisfaction when she
had to go unaccompanied. She stayed till late in the evening, and
came back with a gay account of her calls upon two or three old
friends--the girls of whom she had spoken to Mrs. Mumford. One of
them, Miss Featherstone, she had taken to dine with her at a
restaurant, and afterwards they had spent an hour or two at Miss
Featherstone's lodgings.

'I didn't go near Tulse Hill, and if you knew how I am wondering
what is going on there! Not a line from anyone. I shall write to
mother to-morrow.'

Emmeline produced a letter which had arrived for Miss Derrick.

'Why didn't you give it me before?' Louise exclaimed, impatiently.

'My dear, you had so much to tell me. I waited for the first pause.'

'That isn't from home,' said the girl, after a glance at the
envelope. 'It's nothing.'

After saying good-night, she called to Emmeline from her bedroom
door. Entering the room, Mrs. Mumford saw the open letter in
Louise's hand, and read in her face a desire of confession.

'I want to tell you something. Don't be in a hurry; just a few
minutes. This letter is from Mr. Bowling. Yes, and I've had one from
him before, and I was obliged to answer it.'

'Do you mean they are love-letters?'

'Yes, I'm afraid they are. And it's so stupid, and I'm so vexed. I
don't want to have anything to do with him, as I told you long ago.'
Louise often used expressions which to a stranger would have implied
that her intimacy with Mrs. Mumford was of years' standing. 'He
wrote for the first time last week. Such a silly letter! I wish you
would read it. Well, he said that it was all over between him and
Cissy, and that he cared only for me, and always had, and always
would--you know how men write. He said he considered himself quite
free. Cissy had refused him, and wasn't that enough? Now that I was
away from home, he could write to me, and wouldn't I let him see me?
Of course I wrote that I didn't _want_ to see him, and I thought he
was behaving very badly--though I don't really think so, because
it's all that idiot Cissy's fault. Didn't I do quite right?'

'I think so.'

'Very well. And now he's writing again, you see; oh, such a lot of
rubbish! I can hear him saying it all through his nose. Do tell me
what I ought to do next.'

'You must either pay no attention to the letter, or reply so that he
can't possibly misunderstand you.'

'Call him names, you mean?'

'My dear Louise!'

'But that's the only way with such men. I suppose you never were
bothered with them. I think I'd better not write at all.'

Emmeline approved this course, and soon left Miss Derrick to her
reflections.

The next day Louise carried out her resolve to write for information
regarding the progress of things at Coburg Lodge. She had not long
to wait for a reply, and it was of so startling a nature that she
ran at once to Mrs. Mumford, whom she found in the nursery.

'Do please come down. Here's something I must tell you about. What
do you think mother says? I've to go back home again at once.'

'What's the reason?' Emmeline inquired, knowing not whether to be
glad or sorry.

'I'll read it to you:--"Dear Lou," she says, "you've made a great
deal of trouble, and I hope you're satisfied. Things are all upside
down, and I've never seen dada"--that's Mr. Higgins, of course--"I've
never seen dada in such a bad temper, not since first I knew
him. Mr. B."--that's Mr. Bowling, you know--"has told him plain that
he doesn't think any more of Cissy, and that nothing mustn't be
expected of him."--Oh what sweet letters mother does write!--"That
was when dada went and asked him about his intentions, as he
couldn't help doing, because Cissy is fretting so. It's all over,
and of course you're the cause of it; and, though I can't blame you
as much as the others do, I think you _are_ to blame. And Cissy said
she must go to the seaside to get over it, and she went off
yesterday to Margate to your Aunt Annie's boarding-house, and there
she says she shall stay as long as she doesn't feel quite well, and
dada has to pay two guineas a week for her. So he says at once, 'Now
Loo 'll have to come back. I'm not going to pay for the both of them
boarding out,' he says. And he means it. He has told me to write to
you at once, and you're to come as soon as you can, and he won't be
responsible to Mrs. Mumford for more than another week's
payment."--There! But I shan't go, for all that. The idea! I left
home just to please them, and now I'm to go back just when it suits
their convenience. Certainly not.'

'But what will you do, Louise,' asked Mrs. Mumford, 'if Mr. Higgins
is quite determined?'

'Do? Oh! I shall settle it easy enough. I shall write at once to the
old man and tell him I'm getting on so nicely in every way that I
couldn't dream of leaving you. It's all nonsense, you'll see.'

Emmeline and her husband held a council that night, and resolved
that, whatever the issue of Louise's appeal to her stepfather, this
was a very good opportunity for getting rid of their guest. They
would wait till Louise made known the upshot of her negotiations. It
seemed probable that Mr. Higgins would spare them the unpleasantness
of telling Miss Derrick she must leave. If not, that disagreeable
necessity must be faced.

'I had rather cut down expenses all round,' said Emmeline, 'than
have our home upset in this way. It isn't like home at all. Louise
is a whirlwind, and the longer she stays, the worse it'll be.'

'Yes, it won't do at all,' Mumford assented. 'By the bye, I met
Bilton to-day, and he asked after Miss Derrick. I didn't like his
look or his tone at all. I feel quite sure there's a joke going
round at our expense. Confound it!'

'Never mind. It'll be over in a day or two, and it'll be a lesson to
you, Clarence, won't it?'

'I quite admit that the idea was mine,' her husband replied, rather
irritably. 'But it wasn't I who accepted the girl as a suitable
person.'

'And certainly it wasn't _me_!' rejoined Emmeline. 'You will please
to remember that I said again and again--'

'Oh, hang it, Emmy! We made a blunder, both of us, and don't let us
make it worse by wrangling about it. There you are; people of that
class bring infection into the house. If she stayed here a
twelvemonth, we should have got to throwing things at each other.'

The answer to Louise's letter of remonstrance came in the form of
Mrs. Higgins herself. Shortly before luncheon that lady drove up to
"Runnymede" in a cab, and her daughter, who had just returned from a
walk, was startled to hear of the arrival.

'You've got to come home with me, Lou,' Mrs. Higgins began, as she
wiped her perspiring face. 'I've promised to have you back by this
afternoon. Dada's right down angry; you wouldn't know him. He blames
everything on to you, and you'd better just come home quiet.'

'I shall do nothing of the kind,' answered Louise, her temper
rising.

Mrs. Higgins glared at her and began to rail; the voice was
painfully audible to Emmeline, who just then passed through the
hall. Miss Derrick gave as good as she received; a battle raged for
some minutes, differing from many a former conflict only in the
moderation of pitch and vocabulary due to their being in a
stranger's house.

'Then you won't come?' cried the mother at length. 'I've had my
journey for nothing, have I? Then just go and fetch Mrs.
What's-her-name. She must hear what I've got to say.'

'Mrs. Mumford isn't at home,' answered Louise, with bold mendacity.
'And a very good thing too. I should be sorry for her to see you in
the state you're in.'

'I'm in no more of a state than you are, Louise! And just you listen
to this. Not one farthing more will you have from 'ome--not one
farthing! And you may think yourself lucky if you still '_ave_ a
'ome. For all I know, you'll have to earn your own living, and I'd
like to hear how you mean to do it. As soon as I get back I shall
write to Mrs. What's-her-name and tell her that nothing will be paid
for you after the week that's due and the week that's for notice.
Now just take heed of what you're doing, Lou. It may have more
serious results than you think for.'

'I've thought all I'm going to think,' replied the girl. 'I shall
stay here as long as I like, and be indebted neither to you nor to
stepfather.'

Mrs. Mumford breathed a sigh of thankfulness that she was not called
upon to take part in this scene. It was bad enough that the servant
engaged in laying lunch could hear distinctly Mrs. Higgins's coarse
and violent onslaught. When the front door at length closed she
rejoiced, but with trembling; for the words that fell upon her ear
from the hall announced too plainly that Louise was determined to
stay.




CHAPTER V


Miss Derrick had gone back into the drawing-room, and, to Emmeline's
surprise, remained there. This retirement was ominous; the girl must
be taking some resolve. Emmeline, on her part, braced her courage
for the step on which she had decided. Luncheon awaited them, but it
would be much better to arrive at an understanding before they sat
down to the meal. She entered the room and found Louise leaning on
the back of a chair.

'I dare say you heard the row,' Miss Derrick remarked coldly. 'I'm
very sorry, but nothing of that kind shall happen again.'

Her countenance was disturbed, she seemed to be putting a restraint
upon herself, and only with great effort to subdue her voice.

'What are you going to do?' asked Emmeline, in a friendly tone, but,
as it were, from a distance.

'I am going to ask you to do me a great kindness, Mrs. Mumford.'

There was no reply. The girl paused a moment, then resumed
impulsively.

'Mr. Higgins says that if I don't come home, he won't let me have
any more money. They're going to write and tell you that they won't
be responsible after this for my board and lodging. Of course I
shall not go home; I shouldn't dream of it; I'd rather earn my
living as--as a scullery maid. I want to ask you, Mrs. Mumford,
whether you will let me stay on, and trust me to pay what I owe you.
It won't be for very long, and I promise you I _will_ pay, every
penny.'

The natural impulse of Emmeline's disposition was to reply with
hospitable kindliness; she found it very difficult to maintain her
purpose; it shamed her to behave like the ordinary landlady, to
appear actuated by mean motives. But the domestic strain was growing
intolerable, and she felt sure that Clarence would be exasperated if
her weakness prolonged it.

'Now do let me advise you, Louise,' she answered gently. 'Are you
acting wisely? Wouldn't it be very much better to go home?',

Louise lost all her self-control. Flushed with anger, her eyes
glaring, she broke into vehement exclamations.

'You want to get rid of me! Very well, I'll go this moment. I was
going to tell you something; but you don't care what becomes of me.
I'll send for my luggage; you shan't be troubled with it long. And
you'll be paid all that's owing. I didn't think you were one of that
kind. I'll go this minute.'

'Just as you please,' said Emmeline, 'Your temper is really so
very--'

'Oh, I know. It's always my temper, and nobody else is ever to
blame. I wouldn't stay another night in the house, if I had to sleep
on the Downs!'

She flung out of the room and flew upstairs. Emmeline, angered by
this unwarrantable treatment, determined to hold aloof, and let the
girl do as she would. Miss Derrick was of full age, and quite
capable of taking care of herself, or at all events ought to be.
Perhaps this was the only possible issue of the difficulties in
which they had all become involved; neither Louise nor her parents
could be dealt with in the rational, peaceful way preferred by
well-conditioned people. To get her out of the house was the main
point; if she chose to depart in a whirlwind, that was her own
affair. All but certainly she would go home, to-morrow if not
to-day.

In less than a quarter of an hour her step sounded on the
stairs--would she turn into the dining-room, where Emmeline now sat
at table? No; straight through the hall, and out at the front door,
which closed, however, quite softly behind her. That she did not
slam it seemed wonderful to Emmeline. The girl was not wholly a
savage.

Presently Mrs. Mumford went up to inspect the forsaken chamber.
Louise had packed all her things: of course she must have tumbled
them recklessly into the trunks. Drawers were left open, as if to
exhibit their emptiness, but in other respects the room looked tidy
enough. Neatness and order came by no means naturally to Miss
Derrick, and Emmeline did not know what pains the girl had taken,
ever since her arrival, to live in conformity with the habits of a
'nice' household.

Louise, meanwhile, had gone to the railway station, intending to
take a ticket for Victoria. But half an hour must elapse before the
arrival of a train, and she walked about in an irresolute mood. For
one thing, she felt hungry; at Sutton her appetite had been keen,
and meal-times were always welcome. She entered the refreshment
room, and with inward murmurs made a repast which reminded her of
the excellent luncheon she might now have been enjoying. All the
time, she pondered her situation. Ultimately, instead of booking for
Victoria, she procured a ticket for Epsom Downs, and had not long to
wait for the train.

It was a hot day at the end of June. Wafts of breezy coolness passed
now and then over the high open country, but did not suffice to
combat the sun's steady glare. After walking half a mile or so,
absorbed in thought, Louise suffered so much that she looked about
for shadow. Before her was the towering ugliness of the Grand Stand;
this she had seen and admired when driving past it with her friends;
it did not now attract her. In another direction the Downs were
edged with trees, and that way she turned. All but overcome with
heat and weariness, she at length found a shaded spot where her
solitude seemed secure. And, after seating herself, the first thing
she did was to have a good cry.

Then for an hour she sat thinking, and as she thought her face
gradually emerged from gloom--the better, truer face which so often
allowed itself to be disguised at the prompting of an evil spirit;
her softening lips all but smiled, as if at an amusing suggestion,
and her eyes, in their reverie, seemed to behold a pleasant promise.
Unconsciously she plucked and tasted the sweet stems of grass that
grew about her. At length, the sun's movements having robbed her of
shadow, she rose, looked at her watch, and glanced around for
another retreat. Hard by was a little wood, delightfully grassy and
cool, fenced about with railings she could easily have climbed; but
a notice-board, severely admonishing trespassers, forbade the
attempt. With a petulant remark to herself on the selfishness of
"those people," she sauntered past.

Along this edge of the Downs stands a picturesque row of pine-trees,
stunted, bittered, and twisted through many a winter by the upland
gales. Louise noticed them, only to think for a moment what ugly
trees they were. Before her, east, west, and north, lay the wooded
landscape, soft of hue beneath the summer sky, spreading its
tranquil beauty far away to the mists of the horizon. In vivacious
company she would have called it, and perhaps have thought it, a
charming view; alone, she had no eye for such things--an
indifference characteristic of her mind, and not at all dependent
upon its mood. Presently another patch of shade invited her to
repose again, and again she meditated for an hour or more.

The sun had grown less ardent, and a breeze, no longer fitful, made
walking pleasant. The sight of holiday-making school-children, who,
in their ribboned hats and white pinafores, were having tea not far
away, suggested to Louise that she also would like such refreshment.
Doubtless it might be procured at the inn yonder, near the
racecourse, and thither she began to move. Her thoughts were more at
rest; she had made her plan for the evening; all that had to be done
was to kill time for another hour or so. Walking lightly over the
turf, she noticed the chalk marks significant of golf, and wondered
how the game was played. Without difficulty she obtained her cup of
tea, loitered over it as long as possible, strayed yet awhile about
the Downs, and towards half-past six made for the railway station.

She travelled no further than Sutton, and there lingered in the
waiting room till the arrival of a certain train from London Bridge.
As the train came in she took up a position near the exit. Among the
people who had alighted, her eye soon perceived Clarence Mumford.
She stepped up to him and drew his attention.

'Oh! have you come by the same train?' he asked, shaking hands with
her.

'No. I've been waiting here because I wanted to see you, Mr.
Mumford. Will you spare me a minute or two?'

'Here? In the station?'

'Please--if you don't mind.'

Astonished, Mumford drew aside with her to a quiet part of the long
platform. Louise, keeping a very grave countenance, told him rapidly
all that had befallen since his departure from home in the morning.

'I behaved horridly, and I was sorry for it as soon as I had left
the house. After all Mrs. Mumford's kindness to me, and yours, I
don't know how I could be so horrid. But the quarrel with mother had
upset me so, and I felt so miserable when Mrs. Mumford seemed to
want to get rid of me. I feel sure she didn't really want to send me
away: she was only advising me, as she thought, for my good. But I
can't, and won't, go home. And I've been waiting all the afternoon
to see you. No; not here. I went to Epsom Downs and walked about,
and then came back just in time. And--do you think I might go back?
I don't mean now, at once, but this evening, after you've had
dinner. I really don't know where to go for the night, and it's such
a stupid position to be in, isn't it?'

With perfect naivete, or with perfect simulation of it,
she looked him in the face, and it was Mumford who had to avert his
eyes. The young man felt very uncomfortable.

'Oh! I'm quite sure Emmy will be glad to let you come for the night,
Miss Derrick--'

'Yes, but--Mr. Mumford, I want to stay longer--a few weeks longer.
Do you think Mrs. Mumford would forgive me? I have made up my mind
what to do, and I ought to have told her. I should have, if I hadn't
lost my temper.'

'Well,' replied the other, in grave embarrassment, but feeling that
he had no alternative, 'let us go to the house--'

'Oh! I couldn't. I shouldn't like anyone to know that I spoke to you
about it. It wouldn't be nice, would it? I thought if I came later,
after dinner. And perhaps you could talk to Mrs. Mumford, and--and
prepare her. I mean, perhaps you wouldn't mind saying you were sorry
I had gone so suddenly. And then perhaps Mrs. Mumford--she's so
kind--would say that she was sorry too. And then I might come into
the garden and find you both sitting there--'

Mumford, despite his most uneasy frame of mind, betrayed a passing
amusement. He looked into the girl's face and saw its prettiness
flush with pretty confusion, and this did not tend to restore his
tranquillity.

'What shall you do in the meantime?'

'Oh! go into the town and have something to eat, and then walk
about.'

'You must be dreadfully tired already.'

'Just a little; but I don't mind. It serves me right. I shall be so
grateful to you, Mr. Mumford. If you won't let me come, I suppose I
must go to London and ask one of my friends to take me in.'

'I will arrange it. Come about half-past eight. We shall be in the
garden by then.'

Avoiding her look, he moved away and ran up the stairs. But from the
exit of the station he walked slowly, in part to calm himself, to
assume his ordinary appearance, and in part to think over the comedy
he was going to play.

Emmeline met him at the door, herself too much flurried to notice
anything peculiar in her husband's aspect. She repeated the story
with which he was already acquainted.

'And really, after all, I am so glad!' was her conclusion. 'I didn't
think she had really gone; all the afternoon I've been expecting to
see her back again. But she won't come now, and it is a good thing
to have done with the wretched business. I only hope she will tell
the truth to her people. She might say that we turned her out of the
house. But I don't think so; in spite of all her faults, she never
seemed deceitful or malicious.'

Mumford was strongly tempted to reveal what had happened at the
station, but he saw danger alike in disclosure and in reticence.

When there enters the slightest possibility of jealousy, a man can
never be sure that his wife will act as a rational being. He feared
to tell the simple truth lest Emmeline should not believe his
innocence of previous plotting with Miss Derrick, or at all events
should be irritated by the circumstances into refusing Louise a
lodging for the night. And with no less apprehension he decided at
length to keep the secret, which might so easily become known
hereafter, and would then have such disagreeable consequences.

'Well, let us have dinner, Emmy; I'm hungry. Yes, it's a good thing
she has gone; but I wish it hadn't happened in that way. What a
spitfire she is!'

'I never, never saw the like. And if you had heard Mrs. Higgins! Oh,
what dreadful people! Clarence, hear me register a vow--'

'It was my fault, dear. I'm awfully sorry I got you in for such
horrors. It was wholly and entirely my fault.'

By due insistence on this, Mumford of course put his wife into an
excellent humour, and, after they had dined, she returned to her
regret that the girl should have gone so suddenly. Clarence,
declaring that he would allow himself a cigar, instead of the usual
pipe, to celebrate the restoration of domestic peace, soon led
Emmeline into the garden.

'Heavens! how hot it has been. Eighty-five in our office at
noon--eighty-five! Fellows are discarding waistcoats and wearing
what they call a cummerbund--silk sash round the waist. I think I
must follow the fashion. How should I look, do you think?'

'You don't really mind that we lose the money?' Emmeline asked
presently.

'Pooh! We shall do well enough.--Who's that?'

Someone was entering the garden by the side path. And in a moment
there remained no doubt who the person was. Louise came forward, her
head bent, her features eloquent of fatigue and distress.

'Mrs. Mumford--I couldn't--without asking you to forgive me--'

Her voice broke with a sob. She stood in a humble attitude, and
Emmeline, though pierced with vexation, had no choice but to hold
out a welcoming hand.

'Have you come all the way back from London just to say this?'

'I haven't been to London. I've walked about--all day--and oh, I'm
so tired and miserable! Will you let me stay, just for to-night? I
shall be so grateful.'

'Of course you may stay, Miss Derrick. It was very far from my wish
to see you go off at a moment's notice. But I really couldn't stop
you.'

Mumford had stepped aside, out of hearing. He forgot his private
embarrassment in speculation as to the young woman's character. That
she was acting distress and penitence he could hardly believe;
indeed, there was no necessity to accuse her of dishonest behaviour.
The trivial concealment between him and her amounted to nothing, did
not alter the facts of the situation. But what could be at the root
of her seemingly so foolish existence? Emmeline held to the view
that she was in love with the man Cobb, though perhaps unwilling to
admit it, even in her own silly mind. It might be so, and, _if_ so,
it made her more interesting; for one was tempted to think that
Louise had not the power of loving at all. Yet, for his own part, he
couldn't help liking her; the eyes that had looked into his at the
station haunted him a little, and would not let him think of her
contemptuously. But what a woman to make ones wife! Unless--unless--

Louise had gone into the house. Emmeline approached her husband.

'There! I foresaw it. Isn't vexing?'

'Never mind, dear. She'll go to morrow, or the day after.'

'I wish I could be sure of that.'




CHAPTER VI


Louise did not appear again that evening. Thoroughly tired, she
unpacked her trunks, sat awhile by the open window, listening to a
piano in a neighbouring house, and then jumped into bed. From ten
o'clock to eight next morning she slept soundly.

At breakfast her behaviour was marked with excessive decorum. To the
ordinary civilities of her host and hostess she replied softly,
modestly, in the manner of a very young and timid girl; save when
addressed, she kept silence, and sat with head inclined; a virginal
freshness breathed about her; she ate very little, and that without
her usual gusto, but rather as if performing a dainty ceremony. Her
eyes never moved in Mumford's direction.

The threatened letter from Mrs. Higgins had arrived; Emmeline and
her husband read it before their guest came down. If Louise
continued to reside with them, they entertained her with a full
knowledge that no payment must be expected from Coburg Lodge.
Emmeline awaited the disclosure of her guest's project, which had
more than once been alluded to yesterday; she could not dream of
permitting Louise to stay for more than a day or two, whatever the
suggestion offered. This morning she had again heard from her
sister, Mrs. Grove, who was strongly of opinion that Miss Derrick
should be sent back to her native sphere.

'I shall always feel,' she said to her husband, 'that we have
behaved badly. I was guilty of false pretences. Fortunately, we have
the excuse of her unbearable temper. But for that, I should feel
dreadfully ashamed of myself.'

Very soon after Mumford's departure, Louise begged for a few
minutes' private talk.

'Every time I come into this drawing-room, Mrs. Mumford, I think how
pretty it is. What pains you must have taken in furnishing it! I
never saw such nice curtains anywhere else. And that little
screen--I _am_ so fond of that screen!'

'It was a wedding present from an old friend,' Emmeline replied,
complacently regarding the object, which shone with embroidery of
many colours.

'Will you help me when _I_ furnish _my_ drawing-room?' Louise asked
sweetly. And she added, with a direct look, 'I don't think it will
be very long.'

'Indeed?'

'I am going to marry Mr. Bowling.'

Emmeline could no longer feel astonishment at anything her guest said
or did. The tone, the air, with which Louise made this declaration
affected her with a sense of something quite unforeseen; but, at the
same time, she asked herself why she had not foreseen it. Was not
this the obvious answer to the riddle? All along, Louise had wished
to marry Mr. Bowling. She might or might not have consciously helped
to bring about the rupture between Mr. Bowling and Miss Higgins; she
might, or might not, have felt genuinely reluctant to take advantage
of her half-sister's defeat. But a struggle had been going on in the
girl's conscience, at all events. Yes, this explained everything.
And, on the whole, it seemed to speak in Louise's favour. Her
ridicule of Mr. Bowling's person and character became, in this new
light, a proof of desire to resist her inclinations. She had only
yielded when it was certain that Miss Higgins's former lover had
quite thrown off his old allegiance, and when no good could be done
by self-sacrifice.

'When did you make up your mind to this, Louise?'

'Yesterday, after our horrid quarrel. No, _you_ didn't quarrel; it
was all my abominable temper. This morning I'm going to answer Mr.
Bowling's last letter, and I shall tell him--what I've told you.
He'll be delighted!'

'Then you have really wished for this from the first?'

Louise plucked at the fringe on the arm of her chair, and replied at
length with maidenly frankness.

'I always thought it would be a good marriage for me. But I
never--do believe me--I never tried to cut Cissy out. The truth is I
thought a good deal of the other--of Mr. Cobb. But I knew that I
_couldn't_ marry him. It would be dreadful; we should quarrel
frightfully, and he would kill me--I feel sure he would, he's so
violent in his temper. But Mr. Bowling is very nice; he couldn't get
angry if he tried. And he has a much better position than Mr. Cobb.'

Emmeline began to waver in her conviction and to feel a natural
annoyance.

'And you think,' she said coldly, 'that your marriage will take
place soon?'

'That's what I want to speak about, dear Mrs. Mumford. Did you hear
from my mother this morning? Then you see what my position is. I am
homeless. If I leave you, I don't know where I shall go. When Mr.
Higgins knows I'm going to marry Mr. Bowling he won't have me in
the house, even if I wanted to go back. Cissy will be furious:
she'll come back from Margate just to keep up her father's anger
against me. If you could let me stay here just a short time, Mrs.
Mumford; just a few weeks I should _so_ like to be married from your
house.'

The listener trembled with irritation, and before she could command
her voice Louise added eagerly:

'Of course, when we're married, Mr. Bowling will pay all my debts.'

''You are quite mistaken,' said Emmeline distantly, 'if you think
that the money matter has anything to do with--with my unreadiness
to agree--'

'Oh, I didn't think it--not for a moment. I'm a trouble to you; I
know I am. But I'll be so quiet, dear Mrs. Mumford. You shall hardly
know I'm in the house. If once it's all settled I shall _never_ be
out of temper. Do, please, let me stay! I like you so much, and how
wretched it would be if I had to be married from a lodging-house.'

'I'm afraid, Louise--I'm really afraid--'

'Of my temper?' the girl interrupted. 'If ever I say an angry word
you shall turn me out that very moment. Dear Mrs. Mumford! Oh!
_what_ shall I do if you won't be kind to me? What will become of
me? I have no home, and everybody hates me.'

'Tears streamed down her face; she lay back, overcome with misery.
Emmeline was distracted. She felt herself powerless to act as
common-sense dictated, yet desired more than ever to rid herself of
every shadow of responsibility for the girl's proceedings. The idea
of this marriage taking place at "Runnymede" made her blood run
cold. No, no; _that_ was absolutely out of the question. But equally
impossible did it seem to speak with brutal decision. Once more she
must temporise, and hope for courage on another day.

'I can't--I really can't give you a definite answer till I have
spoken with Mr. Mumford.'

'Oh! I am sure he will do me this kindness,' sobbed Louise.

A slight emphasis on the "he" touched Mrs. Mumford unpleasantly. She
rose, and began to pick out some overblown flowers from a vase on
the table near her. Presently Louise became silent. Before either of
them spoke again a postman's knock sounded at the house-door, and
Emmeline went to see what letter had been delivered. It was for Miss
Derrick; the handwriting, as Emmeline knew, that of Mr. Cobb.

'Oh, bother!' Louise murmured, as she took the letter from Mrs.
Mumford's hand. 'Well, I'm a trouble to everybody, and I don't know
how it'll all end. I daresay I shan't live very long.'

'Don't talk nonsense, Louise.'

'Should you like me to go at once, Mrs. Mumford?' the girl asked,
with a submissive sigh.

'No, no. Let us think over it for a day or two. Perhaps you haven't
quite made up your mind, after all.'

To this, oddly enough, Louise gave no reply. She lingered by the
window, nervously bending and rolling her letter, which she did not
seem to think of opening. After a glance or two of discreet
curiosity, Mrs. Mumford left the room. Daily duties called for
attention, and she was not at all inclined to talk further with
Louise. The girl, as soon as she found herself alone, broke Mr.
Cobb's envelope, which contained four sides of bold handwriting--not
a long letter, but, as usual, vigorously worded. 'Dear Miss
Derrick,' he wrote, 'I haven't been in a hurry to reply to your
last, as it seemed to me that you were in one of your touchy moods
when you sent it. It wasn't my fault that I called at the house when
you were away. I happened to have business at Croydon unexpectedly,
and ran over to Sutton just on the chance of seeing you. And I have
no objection to tell you all I said to your friend there. I am not
in the habit of saying things behind people's backs that I don't
wish them to hear. All I did was to ask out plainly whether Mrs. M.
was trying to persuade you to have nothing to do with me. She said
she wasn't, and that she didn't wish to interfere one way or
another. I told her that I could ask no more than that. She seemed
to me a sensible sort of woman, and I don't suppose you'll get much
harm from her, though I daresay she thinks more about dress and
amusements, and so on, than is good for her or anyone else. You say
at the end of your letter that I'm to let you know when I think of
coming again, and if you mean by that that you would be glad to see
me, I can only say, thank you. I don't mean to give you up yet, and
I don't believe you want me to say what you will. I don't spy after
you; you're mistaken in that. But I'm pretty much always thinking
about you, and I wish you were nearer to me. I may have to go to
Bristol in a week or two, and perhaps I shall be there for a month
or more, so I must see you before then. Will you tell me what day
would suit you, after seven? If you don't want me to come to the
house, then meet me where you like. And there's only one more thing
I have to say--you must deal honestly with me. I can wait, but I
won't be deceived.'

Louise pondered for a long time, turning now to this part of the
letter, now to that. And the lines of her face, though they made no
approach to smiling, indicated agreeable thoughts. Tears had left
just sufficient trace to give her meditations a semblance of
unwonted seriousness.

About midday she went up to her room and wrote letters. The first
was to Miss Cissy Higgins:--'Dear Ciss,--I dare say you would like
to know that Mr. B. has proposed to me. If you have any objection,
please let me know it by return.--Affectionately yours, L. E.
DERRICK.' This she addressed to Margate, and stamped with a little
thump of the fist. Her next sheet of paper was devoted to Mr.
Bowling, and the letter, though brief, cost her some thought. 'Dear
Mr. Bowling,--Your last is so very nice and kind that I feel I ought
to answer it without delay, but I cannot answer in the way you wish.
I must have a long, long time to think over such a very important
question. I don't blame you in the least for your behaviour to
someone we know of; and I think, after all that happened, you were
quite free. It is quite true that she did not behave
straightforwardly, and I am very sorry to have to say it. I shall
not be going home again: I have quite made up my mind about that. I
am afraid I must not let you come here to call upon me. I have a
particular reason for it. To tell you the truth, my friend Mrs.
Mumford is _very_ particular, and rather fussy, and has a rather
trying temper. So please do not come just yet. I am quite well, and
enjoying myself in a _very_ quiet way.--I remain, sincerely yours,
LOUISE E. DERRICK.' Finally she penned a reply to Mr. Cobb, and
this, after a glance at a railway time-table, gave her no trouble at
all. 'Dear Mr. Cobb,' she scribbled, 'if you really _must_ see me
before you go away to Bristol, or wherever it is, you had better
meet me on Saturday at Streatham Station, which is about halfway
between me and you. I shall come by the train from Sutton, which
reaches Streatham at 8.6.--Yours truly, L. E. D.'

To-day was Thursday. When Saturday came the state of things at
"Runnymede" had undergone no change whatever; Emmeline still waited
for a moment of courage, and Mumford, though he did not relish the
prospect, began to think it more than probable that Miss Derrick
would hold her ground until her actual marriage with Mr. Bowling.
Whether that unknown person would discharge the debt his betrothed
was incurring seemed an altogether uncertain matter. Louise, in the
meantime, kept quiet as a mouse--so strangely quiet, indeed, that
Emmeline's prophetic soul dreaded some impending disturbance, worse
than any they had yet suffered.

At luncheon, Louise made known that she would have to leave in the
middle of dinner to catch a train. No explanation was offered or
asked, but Emmeline, it being Saturday, said she would put the
dinner-hour earlier, to suit her friend's convenience. Louise smiled
pleasantly, and said how very kind it was of Mrs. Mumford.

She had no difficulty in reaching Streatham by the time appointed.
Unfortunately, it was a cloudy evening, and a spattering of rain
fell from time to time.

'I suppose you'll be afraid to walk to the Common,' said Mr. Cobb,
who stood waiting at the exit from the station, and showed more
