literature, was craftily testing the actual quality of her education.
Upon the shiver followed a glow, and, in fear lest her cheeks would
redden, she grew angry.

He was replying.

'Partly because it is a delightful winter climate; partly because I have
a friend there; partly because the islands are interesting. A man I knew
at Oxford has gone out there, and is likely to stay. His father owns
nearly the whole of an island; and as he's in very bad health, my friend
may soon come into possession. When he does, he's going to astonish the
natives.'

'How?'

A vision of savages flashed before Nancy's mind. She breathed more
freely, thinking the danger past.

'Simply by making a fortune out of an estate that is lying all but
barren. Before the emancipation of the niggers, the Bahamas flourished
wonderfully; now they are fallen to decay, and ruled, so far as I
understand it, by a particularly contemptible crew of native whites, who
ought all to be kicked into the sea. My friend's father is a man of
no energy; he calls himself magistrate, coroner, superintendent of the
customs, and a dozen other things, but seems to have spent his time for
years in lying about, smoking and imbibing. His son, I'm afraid, waits
impatiently for the old man's removal to a better world. He believes
there are immense possibilities of trade.'

Trying hard to recollect her geography, Miss. Lord affected but a slight
interest.

'There's no direct way of getting there,' Tarrant pursued. 'What route
should you suggest?'

She was right, after all. He wished to convict her of ignorance. Her
cheeks were now burning, beyond a doubt, and she felt revengeful.

'I advise you to make inquiries at a shipping-office,' was her distant
reply.

'It seems'--he was smiling at Nancy--'I shall have to go to New York,
and then take the Cuba mail.'

'Are you going to join your friend in business?'

'Business, I fear, is hardly my vocation.'

There was a tremor on Nancy's lips, and about her eyelids. She said
abruptly:

'I thought you were perhaps in business?'

'Did you? What suggested it?'

Tarrant looked fixedly at her; in his expression, as in his voice, she
detected a slight disdain, and that decided her to the utterance of the
next words.

'Oh'--she had assumed an ingenuous air--'there's the Black Lead that
bears your name. Haven't you something to do with it?'

She durst not watch him, but a change of his countenance was distinctly
perceptible, and for the moment caused her a keen gratification.
His eyes had widened, his lips had set themselves; he looked at once
startled and mortified.

'Black lead?' The words fell slowly, in a voice unlike that she had been
hearing. 'No. I have nothing to do with it.'

The silence was dreadful. Nancy endeavoured to rise, but her limbs would
not do their office. Then, her eyes fixed on the grass, she became aware
that Tarrant himself had stood up.

'Where are the children?' he was saying absently.

He descried them afar off with Miss. Morgan, and began to saunter in
that direction. As soon as his back was turned, Nancy rose and began to
walk towards the house. In a few moments Jessica and the girls were with
her.

'I think we must go,' she said.

They entered, and took leave of Mrs. Baker, who sat alone in the
drawing-room.

'Did you say good-bye to Mr. Tarrant?' Jessica asked, as they came forth
again.

'Yes.'

'I didn't. But I suppose it doesn't matter.'

Nancy had thought of telling her friend what she had done, of boasting
that she had asked the impossible question. But now she felt ashamed of
herself, and something more than ashamed. Never again could she enter
this garden. And it seemed to her that, by a piece of outrageous, of
wanton, folly, she had for ever excluded herself from the society of all
'superior' people.



CHAPTER 7



'Now, _I_ look at it in this way. It's to celebrate the fiftieth year
of the reign of Queen Victoria--yes: but at the same time, and far more,
it's to celebrate the completion of fifty years of Progress. National
Progress, without precedent in the history of mankind! One may say,
indeed, Progress of the Human Race. Only think what has been done in
this half-century: only think of it! Compare England now, compare the
world, with what it was in 1837. It takes away one's breath!'

Thus Mr. Samuel Bennett Barmby, as he stood swaying forward upon his
toes, his boots creaking. Nancy and Jessica listened to him. They were
ready to start on the evening's expedition, but Horace had not yet come
home, and on the chance of his arrival they would wait a few minutes
longer.

'I shall make this the subject of a paper for our Society next
winter--the Age of Progress. And with special reference to one
particular--the Press. Only think now, of the difference between our
newspapers, all our periodicals of to-day, and those fifty years ago.
Did you ever really consider, Miss. Morgan, what a marvellous thing one
of our great newspapers really is? Printed in another way it would
make a volume--absolutely; a positive volume; packed with thought and
information. And all for the ridiculous price of one penny!'

He laughed; a high, chuckling, crowing laugh; the laugh of triumphant
optimism. Of the man's sincerity there could be no question; it beamed
from his shining forehead, his pointed nose; glistened in his prominent
eyes. He had a tall, lank figure, irreproachably clad in a suit of grey:
frock coat, and waistcoat revealing an expanse of white shirt. His cuffs
were magnificent, and the hands worthy of them. A stand-up collar, of
remarkable stiffness, kept his head at the proper level of self-respect.

'By the bye, Miss. Lord, are you aware that the Chinese Empire, with
four _hundred_ MILLION inhabitants, has only _ten_ daily papers?
Positively; only ten.'

'How do you know?' asked Nancy.

'I saw it stated in a paper. That helps one to _grasp_ the difference
between civilisation and barbarism. One doesn't think clearly enough
of common things. Now that's one of the benefits one gets from Carlyle.
Carlyle teaches one to see the marvellous in everyday life. Of course
in many things I don't agree with him, but I shall never lose an
opportunity of expressing my gratitude to Carlyle. Carlyle and
Gurty! Yes, Carlyle and Gurty; those two authors are an education in
themselves.'

He uttered a long 'Ah!' and moved his lips as if savouring a delicious
morsel.

'Now here's an interesting thing. If all the cabs in London were put
end to end,'--he paused between the words, gravely,--'what do you think,
Miss. Morgan, would be the total length?'

'Oh, I have no idea, Mr. Barmby.'

'Forty miles--positively! Forty miles of cabs!'

'How do you know?' asked Nancy.

'I saw it stated in a paper.'

The girls glanced at each other, and smiled. Barmby beamed upon them
with the benevolence of a man who knew his advantages, personal and
social.

And at this moment Horace Lord came in. He had not the fresh appearance
which usually distinguished him; his face was stained with perspiration,
his collar had become limp, the flower at his buttonhole hung faded.

'Well, here I am. Are you going?'

'I suppose you know you have kept us waiting,' said his sister.

'Awf'ly sorry. Couldn't get here before.'

He spoke as if he had not altogether the command of his tongue, and with
a fixed meaningless smile.

'We had better not delay,' said Barmby, taking up his hat. 'Seven
o'clock. We ought to be at Charing Cross before eight; that will allow
us about three hours.'

They set forth at once. By private agreement between the girls, Jessica
Morgan attached herself to Mr. Barmby, allowing Nancy to follow with her
brother, as they walked rapidly towards Camberwell Green. Horace kept
humming popular airs; his hat had fallen a little to the side, and he
swung his cane carelessly. His sister asked him what he had been doing
all day.

'Oh, going about. I met some fellows after the procession. We had a
splendid view, up there on the top of Waterloo House.'

'Did Fanny go home?'

'We met her sisters, and had some lunch at a restaurant. Look here;
you don't want me to-night. You won't mind if I get lost in the crowd?
Barmby will be quite enough to take care of you.'

'You are going to meet her again, I suppose?'

Horace nodded.

'We had better agree on a rendezvous at a certain time. I say, Barmby,
just a moment; if any of us should get separated, we had better know
where to meet, for coming home.'

'Oh, there's no fear of that.'

'All the same, it _might_ happen. There'll be a tremendous crush,
you know. Suppose we say the place where the trams stop, south of
Westminster Bridge, and the time a quarter to eleven?'

This was agreed upon.

At Camberwell Green they mingled with a confused rush of hilarious
crowds, amid a clattering of cabs and omnibuses, a jingling of tram-car
bells. Public-houses sent forth their alcoholic odours upon the hot air.
Samuel Barmby, joyous in his protectorship of two young ladies, for
he regarded Horace as a mere boy, bustled about them whilst they stood
waiting for the arrival of the Westminster car.

'It'll have to be a gallant rush! You would rather be outside, wouldn't
you, Miss. Lord? Here it comes: charge!'

But the charge was ineffectual for their purpose. A throng of far more
resolute and more sinewy people swept them aside, and seized every
vacant place on the top of the vehicle. Only with much struggle did they
obtain places within. In an ordinary mood, Nancy would have resented
this hustling of her person by the profane public; as it was, she half
enjoyed the tumult, and looked forward to get more of it along the
packed streets, with a sense that she might as well amuse herself in
vulgar ways, since nothing better was attainable. This did not, however,
modify her contempt of Samuel Barmby; it seemed never to have occurred
to him that the rough-and-tumble might be avoided, and time gained, by
the simple expedient of taking a cab.

Sitting opposite to Samuel, she avoided his persistent glances by
reading the rows of advertisements above his head. Somebody's 'Blue;'
somebody's 'Soap;' somebody's 'High-class Jams;' and behold, inserted
between the Soap and the Jam--'God so loved the world, that He gave His
only-begotten Son, that whoso believeth in Him should not perish, but
have everlasting life.' Nancy perused the passage without perception of
incongruity, without emotion of any kind. Her religion had long since
fallen to pieces, and universal defilement of Scriptural phrase by
the associations of the market-place had in this respect blunted her
sensibilities.

Barmby was talking to Jessica Morgan. She caught his words now and then.

'Can you tell me what is the smallest tree in the world?--No, it's the
Greenland birch. Its full-grown height is only three inches--positively!
But it spreads over several feet.'

Nancy was tempted to lean forward and say, 'How do you know?' But the
jest seemed to involve her in too much familiarity with Mr Barmby; for
her own peace it was better to treat him with all possible coldness.

A woman near her talked loudly about the procession, with special
reference to a personage whom she called 'Prince of Wiles.' This
enthusiast declared with pride that she had stood at a certain street
corner for seven hours, accompanied by a child of five years old, the
same who now sat on her lap, nodding in utter weariness; together they
were going to see the illuminations, and walk about, with intervals
devoted to refreshments, for several hours more. Beyond sat a
working-man, overtaken with liquor, who railed vehemently at the
Jubilee, and in no measured terms gave his opinion of our Sovereign
Lady; the whole thing was a 'lay,' an occasion for filling the Royal
pocket, and it had succeeded to the tune of something like half a
million of money, wheedled, most of it, from the imbecile poor. 'Shut
up!' roared a loyalist, whose patience could endure no longer. 'We're
not going to let a boozing blackguard like you talk in that way about
'er Majesty!' Thereupon, retort of insult, challenge to combat, clamour
from many throats, deep and shrill. Nancy laughed, and would rather have
enjoyed it if the men had fought.

At Westminster Bridge all jumped confusedly into the street and ran
for the pavement. It was still broad daylight; the sun--a potentate who
keeps no Jubilee--dropping westward amid the hues of summer eventide,
was unmarked, for all his splendour, by the roaring multitudes.

'Where are you going to leave us?' Nancy inquired of her brother.

'Charing Cross, or somewhere about there.'

'Keep by me till then.'

Barmby was endeavouring to secure her companionship. He began to cross
the bridge at her side, but Nancy turned and bade him attend upon Miss.
Morgan, saying that she wished to talk with her brother. In this order
they moved towards Parliament Street, where the crowd began to thicken.

'Now let us decide upon our route,' exclaimed Barmby, with the air of a
popular leader planning a great demonstration. 'Miss. Lord, we will be
directed by your wishes. Where would you like to be when the lighting-up
begins?'

'I don't care. What does it matter? Let us go straight on and see
whatever comes in our way.'

'That's the right spirit! Let us give ourselves up to the occasion! We
can't be wrong in making for Trafalgar Square. Advance!'

They followed upon a group of reeling lads and girls, who yelled in
chorus the popular song of the day, a sentimental one as it happened--

'_Do not forget me, Do not forget me, Think sometimes of me still_'--

Nancy was working herself into a nervous, excited state. She felt it
impossible to walk on and on under Barmby's protection, listening to
his atrocious commonplaces, his enthusiasms of the Young Men's Debating
Society. The glow of midsummer had entered into her blood; she resolved
to taste independence, to mingle with the limitless crowd as one of its
units, borne in whatever direction. That song of the streets pleased
her, made sympathetic appeal to her; she would have liked to join in it.

Just behind her--it was on the broad pavement at Whitehall--some one
spoke her name.

'Miss. Lord! Why, who would have expected to see you here? Shouldn't
have dared to think of such a thing; upon my word, I shouldn't!'

A man of about thirty, dressed without much care, middle-sized, wiry,
ruddy of cheek, and his coarse but strong features vivid with festive
energy, held a hand to her. Luckworth Crewe was his name. Nancy had come
to know him at the house of Mrs. Peachey, where from time to time she
had met various people unrecognised in her own home. His tongue bewrayed
him for a native of some northern county; his manner had no polish, but
a genuine heartiness which would have atoned for many defects. Horace,
who also knew him, offered a friendly greeting; but Samuel Barmby, when
the voice caught his ear, regarded this intruder with cold surprise.

'May I walk on with you?' Crewe asked, when he saw that Miss. Lord felt
no distaste for his company.

Nancy deigned not even a glance at her nominal protector.

'If you are going our way,' she replied.

Barmby, his dignity unobserved, strode on with Miss. Morgan, of whom he
sought information concerning the loud-voiced man. Crewe talked away.

'So you've come out to have a look at it, after all. I saw the Miss
Frenches last Sunday, and they told me you cared no more for the Jubilee
than for a dog-fight. Of course I wasn't surprised; you've other things
to think about. But it's worth seeing, that's my opinion. Were you out
this morning?'

'No. I don't care for Royalties.'

'No more do I. Expensive humbugs, that's what I call 'em. But I had a
look at them, for all that. The Crown Prince was worth seeing; yes, he
really was. I'm not so prejudiced as to deny that. He's the kind of chap
I should like to get hold of, and have a bit of a talk with, and ask him
what he thought about things in general. It's been a big affair, hasn't
it? I know a chap who made a Jubilee Perfume, and he's netting something
like a hundred pounds a day.'

'Have you any Jubilee speculation on hand?'

'Don't ask me! It makes me mad. I had a really big thing,--a Jubilee
Drink,--a teetotal beverage; the kind of thing that would have sold
itself, this weather. A friend of mine hit on it, a clerk in a City
warehouse, one of the cleverest chaps I ever knew. It really was _the_
drink; I've never tasted anything like it. Why, there's the biggest
fortune on record waiting for the man who can supply _the_ drink for
total-abstainers. And this friend of mine had it. He gave me some to
taste one night, about a month ago, and I roared with delight. It was
all arranged. I undertook to find enough capital to start with, and
to manage the concern. I would have given up my work with Bullock and
Freeman. I'd have gone in, tooth and nail, for that drink! I sat up all
one night trying to find a name for it; but couldn't hit on the right
one. A name is just as important as the stuff itself that you want to
sell. Next morning--it was Sunday--I went round to my friend's lodgings,
and'--he slapped his thigh--'I'm blest if the chap hadn't cut his
throat!'

'Why?'

'Betting and forgery. He would have been arrested next day. But the
worst of it was that his beverage perished with him. I hadn't a notion
how it was made; he wouldn't tell me till I planked down money to start
with; and not a drop of it could be found anywhere. And to think that he
had absolutely struck oil, as they say; had nothing to do but sit down
and count the money as it came in! That's the third man I've known
go wrong in less than a year. Betting and embezzlement; betting and
burglary; betting and forgery. I'll tell you some time about the chap
who went in for burglary. One of the best fellows I ever knew; when he
comes out, I must give him a hand. But ten to one he'll burgle again;
they always do; burglary grows on a man, like drink.'

His laughter rang across the street; Barmby, who kept looking back,
surprised and indignant that this acquaintance of Miss. Lord's was
not presented to him, paused for a moment, but Nancy waved to him
commandingly, 'Straight on!'

They reached Charing Cross. Horace, who took no part in the
conversation, and had dropped behind, at this point found an opportunity
of stealing away. It was Crewe who first remarked his absence.

'Hollo! where's your brother?'

'Gone, evidently.--Hush! Don't say anything. Will you do something for
me, Mr. Crewe?'

'Of course I will. What is it?'

Nancy pursued in a low voice.

'He's gone to meet Fanny French. At least, he told me so; but I want to
know whether it is really Fanny, or some one else. He said they were to
meet in front of the Haymarket Theatre. Will you go as quickly as you
can, and see if Fanny is there?'

Crewe laughed.

'Like a bird!--But how am I to meet you again?'

'We'll be at the top of Regent Street at nine o'clock,--by Peter
Robinson's. Don't lose time.'

He struck off in the westerly direction, and Barmby, looking round at
that moment, saw him go. Engrossed in thought of Nancy, Samuel did not
yet perceive that her brother had vanished.

'Your friend isn't coming any further?' he said, in a tone of
forbearance.

'No.'

'But where's Mr. Lord?' exclaimed Jessica.

Nancy pretended to look back for him, and for a minute or two they
waited. Barmby, glad to be delivered from both male companions, made
light of the matter; Horace could take care of himself; they had the
appointment for a quarter to eleven;--on! And he now fixed himself
resolutely at Nancy's side.

She, delighted with the success of her stratagem, and careless of what
might result from it, behaved more companionably. To Luckworth Crewe's
society she had no objection; indeed, she rather liked him; but his
presence would have hindered the escape for which she was preparing.
Poor Jessica might feel it something of a hardship to pass hours alone
with 'the Prophet,' but that could not be helped. Nancy would be free
to-night, if never again. They turned into the Strand, and Barmby voiced
his opinion of the public decorations.

'There's very little of what can be called Art,--very little indeed. I'm
afraid we haven't made much progress in Art.--Now what would Ruskin say
to this kind of thing? The popular taste wants educating. My idea is
that we ought to get a few leading men Burne Jones and--and William
Morris--and people of that kind, you know, Miss. Lord,--to give lectures
in a big hall on the elements of Art. A great deal might be done in that
way, don't you think so, Miss. Morgan?'

'I have no faith in anything popular,' Jessica replied loftily.

'No, no. But, after all, the people have got the upper hand now-a-days,
and we who enjoy advantages of education, of culture, ought not to
allow them to remain in darkness. It isn't for our own interest, most
decidedly it isn't.'

'Did your sisters go to see the procession?' Nancy asked.

'Oh, they were afraid of the crowd. The old gentleman took them out to
Tooting Common this afternoon, and they enjoyed themselves. Perhaps
I should have been wiser if I had imitated their example; I mean this
morning; of course I wouldn't have missed this evening for anything
whatever. But somehow, one feels it a sort of duty to see something of
these great public holidays. I caught a glimpse of the procession. In
its way it was imposing--yes, really. After all, the Monarchy is a great
_fact_--as Gurty would have said. I like to keep my mind open to facts.'

The sun had set, and with approach of dusk the crowds grew denser. Nancy
proposed a return westwards; the clubs of Pall Mall and of St James's
Street would make a display worth seeing, and they must not miss
Piccadilly.

'A little later,' said their escort, with an air of liberality, 'we
must think of some light refreshment. We shall be passing a respectable
restaurant, no doubt.'

Twilight began to obscure the distance. Here and there a house-front
slowly marked itself with points of flame, shaping to wreath, festoon,
or initials of Royalty. Nancy looked eagerly about her, impatient for
the dark, wishing the throng would sweep her away. In Pall Mall, Barmby
felt it incumbent upon him to name the several clubs, a task for which
he was inadequately prepared. As he stood staring in doubt at one of the
coldly insolent facades, Jessica gazing in the same direction, Nancy
saw that her moment had come. She darted off, struggled through a moving
crowd, and reached the opposite pavement. All she had now to do was to
press onward with the people around her; save by chance, she could not
possibly be discovered.

Alarm at her daring troubled her for a few minutes. As a matter of
course Barmby would report this incident to her father,--unless she
plainly asked him not to do so, for which she had no mind. Yet what did
it matter? She had escaped to enjoy herself, and the sense of freedom
soon overcame anxieties. No one observed her solitary state; she was one
of millions walking about the streets because it was Jubilee Day, and
every moment packed her more tightly among the tramping populace. A
procession, this, greatly more significant than that of Royal personages
earlier in the day. Along the main thoroughfares of mid-London,
wheel-traffic was now suspended; between the houses moved a double
current of humanity, this way and that, filling the whole space, so
that no vehicle could possibly have made its way on the wonted track.
At junctions, pickets of police directed progress; the slowly advancing
masses wheeled to left or right at word of command, carelessly obedient.
But for an occasional bellow of hilarious blackguardism, or for a song
uplifted by strident voices, or a cheer at some flaring symbol that
pleased the passers, there was little noise; only a thud, thud of
footfalls numberless, and the low, unvarying sound that suggested some
huge beast purring to itself in stupid contentment.

Nancy forgot her identity, lost sight of herself as an individual. Her
blood was heated by close air and physical contact. She did not think,
and her emotions differed little from those of any shop-girl let loose.
The 'culture,' to which she laid claim, evanesced in this atmosphere
of exhalations. Could she have seen her face, its look of vulgar
abandonment would have horrified her.

Some one trod violently on her heel, and she turned with a half-angry
laugh, protesting. 'Beg your pardon, miss,' said a young fellow of the
clerkly order. 'A push be'ind made me do it.' He thrust himself to a
place beside her, and Nancy conversed with him unrestrainedly, as though
it were a matter of course. The young man, scrutinising her with much
freedom, shaped clerkly compliments, and, in his fashion, grew lyrical;
until, at a certain remark which he permitted himself, Nancy felt it
time to shake him off. Her next encounter was more noteworthy. Of a
sudden she felt an arm round her waist, and a man, whose breath declared
the source of his inspiration, began singing close to her ear the
operatic ditty, 'Queen of my Heart.' He had, moreover, a good tenor
voice, and belonged, vaguely, to some stratum of educated society.

'I think you had better leave me alone,' said Nancy, looking him
severely in the face.

'Well, if you really think so,'--he seemed struck by her manner of
speech,--'of course I will: but I'd much rather not.'

'I might find it necessary to speak to a policeman at the next corner.'

'Oh, in that case.'--He raised his hat, and fell aside. And Nancy felt
that, after all, the adventure had been amusing.

She was now in Regent Street, and it came to her recollection that she
had made an appointment with Luckworth Crewe for nine o'clock. Without
any intention of keeping it; but why not do so? Her lively acquaintance
would be excellent company for the next hour, until she chose to bring
the escapade to an end. And indeed, save by a disagreeable struggle,
she could hardly change the direction of her steps. It was probably past
nine; Crewe might have got tired of waiting, or have found it impossible
to keep a position on the pavement. Drawing near to the top of Regent
Street, she hoped he might be there. And there he was, jovially
perspiring; he saw her between crowded heads, and crushed through to her
side.



CHAPTER 8



'Where are your friends?'

'That's more than I can tell you.'

They laughed together.

'It's a miracle we've been able to meet,' said Crewe. 'I had to thrash a
fellow five minutes ago, and was precious near getting run in. Shall we
go the Tottenham Court Road way? Look out! You'd better hold on to my
arm. These big crossings are like whirlpools; you might go round and
round, and never get anywhere. Don't be afraid; if any one runs up
against you, I'll knock him down.'

'There wouldn't be room for him to fall,' said Nancy, wild with
merriment, as they swayed amid the uproar. For the first time she
understood how perilous such a crowd might be. A band of roisterers,
linked arm in arm, were trying to break up the orderly march of
thousands into a chaotic fight. The point for which Crewe made was
unattainable; just in front of him a woman began shrieking hysterically;
another fainted, and dropped into her neighbour's arms.

'Don't get frightened!'

'Not I! I like it. It's good fun.'

'You're the right sort, you are. But we must get out of this. It's worse
than the pit-door on the first night of a pantomime. I must hold you up;
don't mind.'

His arm encircled her body, and for a moment now and then he carried
rather than led her. They were safe at length, in the right part of
Oxford Street, and moving with the stream.

'I couldn't find your brother,' Crewe had leisure to say; 'and I didn't
see Fanny French. There weren't many people about just then, either.
They must have gone off before I came.'

'Yes, they must. It doesn't matter.'

'You have some life in you.' He gazed at her admiringly. 'You're worth
half a million of the girls that squeak and wobble when there's a bit of
rough play going on.'

'I hope so. Did you set me down as one of that kind?'

Nancy found that her tongue had achieved a liberty suitable to the
occasion. She spoke without forethought, and found pleasure in her
boldness.

'Not I,' Crewe answered. 'But I never had a chance before now of telling
you what I thought.'

Some one in front of them ignited a Bengal light and threw it into the
air; the flame flashed across Nancy's features, and fell upon the hat of
a man near her.

'How do you mean to get home?' asked Crewe presently. Nancy explained
that all her party were to meet on the other side of the river.

'Oh, then, there's plenty of time. When you've had enough of this kind
of thing we can strike off into the quiet streets. If you were a man,
which I'm glad you're not, I should say I was choking for a glass of
beer.'

'Say it, and look for a place where you can quench your thirst.'

'It must be a place, then, where you can come in as well. You don't
drink beer, of course, but we can get lemonade and that kind of thing.
No wonder we get thirsty; look up there.'

Following the direction of his eyes, Nancy saw above the heads of the
multitude a waving dust-canopy, sent up by myriad tramplings on the
sun-scorched streets. Glare of gas illumined it in the foreground;
beyond, it dimmed all radiance like a thin fog.

'We might cut across through Soho,' he pursued, 'and get among the
restaurants. Take my arm again. Only a bit of cross-fighting, and we
shall be in the crowd going the other way. Did you do physics at school?
Remember about the resultant of forces? Now _we_'re a force tending
to the right, and the crowd is a force making for straight on; to find
the--'

His hat was knocked over his eyes, and the statement of the problem
ended in laughter.

With a good deal of difficulty they reached one of the southward byways;
and thenceforth walking was unimpeded.

'You know that I call myself Luckworth Crewe,' resumed Nancy's companion
after a short silence.

'Of course I do.'

'Well, the fact is, I've no right to either of the names. I thought I'd
just tell you, for the fun of the thing; I shouldn't talk about it to
any one else that I know. They tell me I was picked up on a doorstep
in Leeds, and the wife of a mill-hand adopted me. Their name was Crewe.
They called me Tom, but somehow it isn't a name I care for, and when I
was grown up I met a man called Luckworth, who was as kind as a father
to me, and so I took his name in place of Tom. That's the long and short
of it.'

Nancy looked a trifle disconcerted.

'You won't think any worse of me, because I haven't a name of my own?'

'Why should I? It isn't your fault.'

'No. But I'm not the kind of man to knuckle under. I think myself just
as good as anybody else I'll knock the man down that sneers at me; and
I won't thank anybody for pitying me; that's the sort of chap I am.
And I'm going to have a big fortune one of these days. It's down in the
books. I know I shall live to be a rich man, just as well as I know that
I'm walking down Dean Street with Miss. Lord.'

'I should think it very possible,' his companion remarked.

'It hasn't begun yet. I can only lay my hand on a few hundred pounds,
one way and another. And I'm turned thirty. But the next ten years are
going to do it. Do you know what I did last Saturday? I got fifteen
hundred pounds' worth of advertising for our people, from a chap that's
never yet put a penny into the hands of an agent. I went down and talked
to him like a father. He was the hardest nut I ever had to crack, but in
thirty-five minutes I'd got him--like a roach on a hook. And it'll be
to his advantage, mind you. That fifteen hundred 'll bring him in more
business than he's had for ten years past. I got him to confess he was
going down the hill. "Of course," I said, "because you don't know how to
advertise, and won't let anybody else know for you?" In a few minutes
he was telling me he'd dropped more than a thousand on a patent that
was out of date before it got fairly going. "All right," said I. "Here's
your new cooking-stove. You've dropped a thousand on the other thing;
give your advertising to us, and I'll guarantee you shall come home on
the cooking-stove."'

'Come home on it?' Nancy inquired, in astonishment.

'Oh, it's our way of talking,' said the other, with his hearty laugh.
'It means to make up one's loss. And he'll do it. And when he has, he'll
think no end of me.'

'I daresay.'

'Not long ago, I boxed a chap for his advertising. A fair turn-up with
the gloves. Do you suppose I licked him? Not I; though I could have done
it with one hand. I just let him knock me out of time, and two minutes
after he put all his business into my hands.'

'Oh, you'll get rich,' declared Nancy, laughing. 'No doubt about it.'

'There was a spot down the South Western Railway where we wanted to
stick up a board, a great big board, as ugly as they make 'em. It was in
a man's garden; a certain particular place, where the trains slow, and
folks have time to read the advertisement and meditate on it. That
chap wouldn't listen. What! spoil his garden with our da----with our
confounded board! not for five hundred a year! Well, I went down, and I
talked to him--'

'Like a father,' put in Nancy.

'Just so, like a father. "Look here," said I, "my dear sir, you're
impeding the progress of civilisation. How could we have become what we
are without the modern science and art of advertising? Till advertising
sprang up, the world was barbarous. Do you suppose people kept
themselves clean before they were reminded at every corner of the
benefits of soap? Do you suppose they were healthy before every wall and
hoarding told them what medicine to take for their ailments? Not they
indeed! Why, a man like you--an enlightened man, I see it in your face
(he was as ugly as Ben's bull-dog), ought to be proud of helping on the
age." And I made him downright ashamed of himself. He asked me to have a
bit of dinner, and we came to terms over the cheese.'

In this strain did Luckworth Crewe continue to talk across the gloomy
solitudes of Soho. And Nancy would on no account have had him cease.
She was fascinated by his rough vigour and by his visions of golden
prosperity. It seemed to her that they reached very quickly the
restaurant he had in view. With keen enjoyment of the novelty, she
followed him between tables where people were eating, drinking, smoking,
and took a place beside him on a cushioned seat at the end of the room.

'I know you're tired,' he said. 'There's nearly half-an-hour before you
need move.'

Nancy hesitated in her choice of a refreshment. She wished to have
something unusual, something that fitted an occasion so remarkable,
yet, as Crewe would of course pay, she did not like to propose anything
expensive.

'Now let me choose for you,' her companion requested. 'After all that
rough work, you want something more than a drop of lemonade. I'm going
to order a nice little bottle of champagne out of the ice, and a pretty
little sandwich made of whatever you like.'

'Champagne--?'

It had been in her thoughts, a sparkling audacity. Good; champagne let
it be. And she leaned back in defiant satisfaction.

'I didn't expect much from Jubilee Day,' observed the man of business,
'but that only shows how things turn out--always better or worse than
you think for. I'm not likely to forget it; it's the best day I've had
in my life yet, and I leave you to guess who I owe _that_ to.'

'I think this is good wine,' remarked Nancy, as if she had not heard
him.

'Not bad. You wouldn't suppose a fellow of my sort would know anything
about it. But I do. I've drunk plenty of good champagne, and I shall
drink better.'

Nancy ate her sandwich and smiled. The one glass sufficed her; Crewe
drank three. Presently, looking at her with his head propped on his
hand, he said gravely:

'I wonder whether this is the last walk we shall have together?'

'Who can say?' she answered in a light tone.

'Some one ought to be able to say.'

'I never make prophecies, and never believe other people's.'

'Shows your good sense. But _I_ make wishes, and plenty of them.'

'So do I,' said Nancy.

'Then let us both make a wish to ourselves,' proposed Crewe, regarding
her with eyes that had an uncommon light in them.

His companion laughed, then both were quiet for a moment.

They allowed themselves plenty of time to battle their way as far
as Westminster Bridge. At one point police and crowd were in brief
conflict; the burly guardians of order dealt thwacking blows, right and
left, sound fisticuffs, backed with hearty oaths. The night was young;
by magisterial providence, hours of steady drinking lay before the
hardier jubilants. Thwacks and curses would be no rarity in another hour
or two.

At the foot of Parliament Street, Nancy came face to face with Samuel
Barmby, on whose arm hung the wearied Jessica. Without heeding their
exclamations, she turned to her protector and bade him a hearty
good-night. Crewe accepted his dismissal. He made survey of Barmby, and
moved off singing to himself, '_Do not forget me--do not forget me_--'




Part II: Nature's Graduate



CHAPTER 1



The disorder which Stephen Lord masked as a 'touch of gout' had in
truth a much more disagreeable name. It was now twelve months since his
doctor's first warning, directed against the savoury meats and ardent
beverages which constituted his diet; Stephen resolved upon a change
of habits, but the flesh held him in bondage, and medical prophecy was
justified by the event. All through Jubilee Day he suffered acutely;
for the rest of the week he remained at home, sometimes sitting in the
garden, but generally keeping his room, where he lay on a couch.

A man of method and routine, sedentary, with a strong dislike of
unfamiliar surroundings, he could not be persuaded to try change of
air. The disease intensified his native stubbornness, made him by turns
fretful and furious, disposed him to a sullen solitude. He would accept
no tendance but that of Mary Woodruff; to her, as to his children, he
kept up the pretence of gout. He was visited only by Samuel Barmby, with
whom he discussed details of business, and by Mr. Barmby, senior, his
friend of thirty years, the one man to whom he unbosomed himself.

His effort to follow the regimen medically prescribed to him was even
now futile. At the end of a week's time, imagining himself somewhat
better, he resumed his daily walk to Camberwell Road, but remained at
the warehouse only till two or three o'clock, then returned and sat
alone in his room. On one of the first days of July, when the weather
was oppressively hot, he entered the house about noon, and in a few
minutes rang his bell. Mary Woodruff came to him. He was sitting on the
couch, pale, wet with perspiration, and exhausted.

'I want something to drink,' he said wearily, without raising his eyes.

'Will you have the lime-water, sir?'

'Yes--what you like.'

Mary brought it to him, and he drank two large glasses, with no pause.

'Where is Nancy?'

'In town, sir. She said she would be back about four.'

He made an angry movement.

'What's she doing in town? She said nothing to me. Why doesn't she come
back to lunch? Where does she go to for all these hours?'

'I don't know, sir.'

The servant spoke in a low, respectful voice, looking at her master with
eyes that seemed to compassionate him.

'Well, it doesn't matter.' He waved a hand, as if in dismissal.
'Wait--if I'm to be alone, I might as well have lunch now. I feel
hungry, as if I hadn't eaten anything for twenty-four hours. Get me
something, Mary.'

Later in the afternoon his bell again sounded, and Mary answered it. As
he did not speak at once,--he was standing by the window with his hands
behind him,--she asked him his pleasure.

'Bring me some water, Mary, plain drinking-water.'

She returned with a jug and glass, and he took a long draught.

'No, don't go yet. I want to--to talk to you about things. Sit down
there for a minute.'

He pointed to the couch, and Mary, with an anxious look, obeyed him.

'I'm thinking of leaving this house, and going to live in the country.
There's no reason why I shouldn't. My partner can look after the
business well enough.'

'It might be the best thing you could do, sir. The best for your
health.'

'Yes, it might. I'm not satisfied with things. I want to make a decided
change, in every way.'

His face had grown more haggard during the last few days, and his eyes
wandered, expressing fretfulness or fear; he spoke with effort, and
seemed unable to find the words that would convey his meaning.

'Now I want you to tell me plainly, what do you think of Nancy?'

'Think of her, sir?'

'No, no--don't speak in that way. I don't want you to call me 'sir'; it
isn't necessary; we've known each other so long, and I think of you as
a friend, a very good friend. Think of me in the same way, and speak
naturally. I want to know your opinion of Nancy.'

The listener had a face of grave attention: it signified no surprise, no
vulgar self-consciousness, but perhaps a just perceptible pleasure. And
in replying she looked steadily at her master for a moment.

'I really don't feel I can judge her, Mr. Lord. It's true, in a way, I
ought to know her very well, as I've seen her day by day since she was
a little thing. But now she's a well-educated and clever young lady, and
she has got far beyond me--'

'Ay, there it is, there it is!' Stephen interrupted with bitterness.
'She's got beyond us--beyond me as well as you. And she isn't what
I meant her to be, very far from it. I haven't brought them up as I
wished. I don't know--I'm sure I don't know why. It was in own hands.
When they were little children, I said to myself: hey shall grow up
plain, good, honest girl and boy. I said that I wouldn't educate them
very much; I saw little good that came of it, in our rank of life.
I meant them to be simple-minded. I hoped Nancy would marry a plain
countryman, like the men I used to know when I was a boy; a farmer, or
something of that kind. But see how it's come about. It wasn't that I
altered my mind about what was best. But I seemed to have no choice.
For one thing, I made more money at business than I had expected, and
so--and so it seemed that they ought to be educated above me and mine.
There was my mother, did a better woman ever live? She had no education
but that of home. She could have brought up Nancy in the good,
old-fashioned way, if I had let her. I wish I had, yes, I wish I had.'

'I don't think you could have felt satisfied,' said the listener, with
intelligent sympathy.

'Why not? If she had been as good and useful a woman as _you_ are--'

'Ah, you mustn't think in that way, Mr. Lord. I was born and bred to
service. Your daughter had a mind given her at her birth, that would
never have been content with humble things. She was meant for education
and a higher place.'

'What higher place is there for her? She thinks herself too good for the
life she leads here, and yet I don't believe she'll ever find a place
among people of a higher class. She has told me herself it's my fault.
She says I ought to have had a big house for her, so that she might make
friends among the rich. Perhaps she's right. I have made her neither
one thing nor another. Mary, if I had never come to London, I might have
lived happily. My place was away there, in the old home. I've known that
for many a year. I've thought: wait till I've made a little more money,
and I'll go back. But it was never done; and now it looks to me as if
I had spoilt the lives of my children, as well as my own. I can't trust
Nancy, that's the worst of it. You don't know what she did on Jubilee
night. She wasn't with Mr. Barmby and the others--Barmby told me about
it; she pretended to lose them, and went off somewhere to meet a man
she's never spoken to me about. Is that how a good girl would act? I
didn't speak to her about it; what use? Very likely she wouldn't tell me
the truth. She takes it for granted I can't understand her. She thinks
her education puts her above all plain folk and their ways--that's it.'

Mary's eyes had fallen, and she kept silence.

'Suppose anything happened to me, and they were left to themselves. I
have money to leave between them, and of course they know it. How could
it do them anything but harm? Do you know that Horace wants to marry
that girl Fanny French--a grinning, chattering fool--if not worse.
He has told me he shall do as he likes. Whether or no it was right to
educate Nancy, I am very sure that I ought to have done with _him_ as I
meant at first. He hasn't the brains to take a good position. When his
schooling went on year after year, I thought at last to make of him
something better than his father--a doctor, or a lawyer. But he hadn't
the brains: he disappointed me bitterly. And what use can he make of
my money, when I'm in my grave? If I die soon he'll marry, and ruin
his life. And won't it be the same with Nancy? Some plotting, greedy
fellow--the kind of man you see everywhere now-a-days, will fool her for
the money's sake.'

'We must hope they'll be much older and wiser before they have to act
for themselves,' said Mary, looking into her master's troubled face.

'Yes!' He came nearer to her, with a sudden hopefulness. 'And whether I
live much longer or not, I can do something to guard them against their
folly. They needn't have the money as soon as I am gone.'

He seated himself in front of his companion.

'I want to ask you something, Mary. If they were left alone, would you
be willing to live here still, as you do now, for a few more years?'

'I shall do whatever you wish--whatever you bid me, Mr. Lord,' answered
the woman, in a voice of heartfelt loyalty.

'You would stay on, and keep house for them?'
