She spoke in a passionate whisper, and Jessica felt her trembling.

'You needn't have the least fear of me, dear.'

'I believe it. Kiss me, and good-night!'




Part III: Into Bontage




CHAPTER 1



During his daughter's absence, Stephen Lord led a miserable life. The
wasting disease had firm hold upon him; day by day it consumed his
flesh, darkened his mind. The more need he had of nursing and restraint,
the less could he tolerate interference with his habits, invasion of
his gloomy solitude. The doctor's visits availed nothing; he listened to
advice, or seemed to listen, but with a smile of obstinate suspicion on
his furrowed face which conveyed too plain a meaning to the adviser.

On one point Mary had prevailed with him. After some days' resistance,
he allowed her to transform the cabin-like arrangements of his room, and
give it the appearance of a comfortable bed-chamber. But he would not
take to his bed, and the suggestion of professional nursing excited his
wrath.

'Do you write to Nancy?' he asked one morning of his faithful attendant,
with scowling suspicion.

'No.'

'You are telling me the truth?'

'I never write to any one.'

'Understand plainly that I won't have a word said to her about me.'

This was when Horace had gone away to Scarborough, believing, on his
father's assurance, that there was no ground whatever for anxiety.
Sometimes Mr. Lord sat hour after hour in an unchanging position, his
dull eyes scarcely moving from one point. At others he paced his room,
or wandered about the house, or made an attempt at gardening--which
soon ended in pain and exhaustion. Towards night he became feverish,
his hollow cheeks glowing with an ominous tint. In the morning he
occasionally prepared himself as if to start for his place of business;
he left the house, and walked for perhaps a couple of hundred yards,
then slackened his pace, stopped, looked about him in an agony of
indecision, and at length returned. After this futile endeavour, he
had recourse to the bottles in his cupboard, and presently fell into a
troubled sleep.

At the end of the second week, early one evening, three persons came to
him by appointment: his partner Samuel Barmby, Mr. Barmby, senior, and a
well-dressed gentleman whom Mary--she opened the door to them--had never
seen before. They sat together in the drawing-room for more than
an hour; then the well-dressed gentleman took his leave, the others
remaining for some time longer.

The promoted servant, at Mr. Lord's bidding, had made a change in her
dress; during the latter part of the day she presented the appearance
of a gentlewoman, and sat, generally with needlework, sometimes with
a book, alone in the dining-room. On a Sunday, whilst Nancy and
her brother were away, the Barmby family--father, son, and two
daughters--came to take tea and spend the evening, Mary doing the
honours of the house; she bore herself without awkwardness, talked
simply, and altogether justified Mr. Lord's opinion of her. When the
guests were gone, Stephen made no remark, but, in saying good-night to
her, smiled for an instant--the first smile seen upon his face for many
days.

Mary remained ignorant of the disease from which he was suffering;
in the matter of his diet, she consulted and obeyed him, though often
enough it seemed to her that his choice suited little with the state of
an invalid. He ate at irregular times, and frequently like a starving
man. Mary suspected that, on the occasions when he went out for
half-an-hour after dark, he brought back food with him: she had seen him
enter with something concealed beneath his coat. All his doings were to
her a subject of ceaseless anxiety, of a profound distress which, in
his presence, she was obliged to conceal. If she regarded him sadly,
the sufferer grew petulant or irate. He would not endure a question
concerning his health.

On the day which was understood to be Nancy's last at Teignmouth, he
brightened a little, and talked with pleasure, as it seemed, of her
return on the morrow. Horace had written that he would be home this
evening, but Mr. Lord spoke only of his daughter. At about six o'clock
he was sitting in the garden, and Mary brought him a letter just
delivered; he looked at the envelope with a smile.

'To tell us the train she's coming by, no doubt.'

Mary waited. When Mr. Lord had read the brief note, his face darkened,
first with disappointment, then with anger.

'Here, look at it,' he said harshly. 'What else was to be expected?'

'Dearest Father,' wrote Nancy, 'I am sorry that our return must be put
off; we hope to get back on Friday evening. Of course this will make no
difference to you.--With best love, dear father, and hoping I shall find
you much better--'

'What does she mean by behaving in this way?' resumed the angry voice,
before Mary had read to the end. 'What does she mean by it? Who gave her
leave to stay longer? Not a word of explanation. How does she know it
will make no difference to me? What does she mean by it?'

'The fine weather has tempted them,' replied Mary. 'I daresay they want
to go somewhere.'

'What right has she to make the change at a moment's notice?'
vociferated the father, his voice suddenly recovering its old power,
his cheeks and neck suffused with red wrath. 'And hopes she will find me
better. What does _she_ care whether she finds me alive or dead?'

'Oh, don't say that! You wouldn't let her know that you were worse.'

'What does it mean? I hate this deceitful behaviour! She knew before, of
course she knew; and she left it to the last moment, so that I couldn't
write and prevent her from staying. As if I should have wished to! As
if I cared a brass farthing how long she stays, or, for that matter,
whether I ever see her again!'

He checked the course of his furious speech, and stood staring at the
letter.

'What did you say?' He spoke now in a hoarse undertone. 'You thought
they were going somewhere?'

'Last year there used to be steamers that went to places on certain
days--'

'Nonsense! She wouldn't alter all their plans for that. It's something I
am not to know--of course it is. She's deceitful--like all women.'

He met Mary's eye, suddenly turned upon him. His own fell before it, and
without speaking again he went into the house.

In half-an-hour's time his bell rang, and not Mary, but the young
servant responded. According to her directions, she knocked at the door,
and, without opening it, asked her master's pleasure. Mr. Lord said that
he was going out, and would not require a meal till late in the evening.

It was nearly ten o'clock when he returned. Mary, sitting in the front
room, rose at his entrance.

'I want nothing,' he said. 'I've been to the Barmbys'.' Voice and
movements proved how the effort had taxed him. In sitting down,
he trembled; fever was in his eyes, and pain in every line of his
countenance.

Mary handed him a letter; it came from Horace, and was an intimation
that the young gentleman would not return to-night, but to-morrow. When
Mr. Lord had read it, he jerked a contemptuous laugh, and threw the
sheet of note-paper across the table.

'There you are. Not much to choose between daughter and son. He's due at
business in the morning; but what does that matter? It doesn't suit his
lordship to keep time.'

He laughed again, his emphasis on 'lordship' showing that he consciously
played with the family name.

'But I was a fool to be angry. Let them come when they will.'

For a few minutes he lay back in the chair, gazing at vacancy.

'Has the girl gone to bed?'

'I'll tell her she can go.'

Mary soon returned, and took up the book with which she had been
engaged. In a low voice, and as if speaking without much thought,
Stephen asked her what she was reading. It was a volume of an old
magazine, bought by Mr. Lord many years ago.

'Yes, yes. Nancy laughs at it--calls it old rubbish. These young people
are so clever.'

His companion made no remark. Unobserved, he scrutinised her face for a
long time, and said at length:

'Don't let _us_ fall out, Mary. You're not pleased with me, and I know
why. I said all women were deceitful, and you took it too seriously.
You ought to know me better. There's something comes on me every now and
then, and makes me say the worst I can no matter who it hurts. Could I
be such a fool as to think ill of _you_?'

'It did hurt me,' replied the other, still bent over her book. 'But it
was only the sound of it. I knew you said more than you meant.'

'I'm a fool, and I've been a fool all my life. Is it likely I should
have wise children? When I went off to the Barmbys', I thought of
sending Samuel down to Teignmouth, to find out what they were at. But I
altered my mind before I got there. What good would it have done? All
I _can_ do I've done already. I made my will the other day; it's signed
and witnessed. I've made it as I told you I should. I'm not much longer
for this world, but I've saved the girl from foolishness till she's
six-and-twenty. After that she must take care of herself.'

They sat silent whilst the clock on the mantelpiece ticked away a
few more minutes. Mr. Lord's features betrayed the working of turbid
thought, a stern resentment their prevailing expression. When reverie
released him, he again looked at his companion.

'Mary, did you ever ask yourself what sort of woman Nancy's mother may
have been?'

The listener started, like one in whom a secret has been surprised. She
tried to answer, but after all did not speak.

'I'll tell you,' Stephen pursued. 'Yes, I'll tell you. You must know it.
Not a year after the boy's birth, she left me. And I made myself free of
her--I divorced her.'

Their eyes just met.

'You needn't think that it cost me any suffering. Not on her account;
not because I had lost my wife. I never felt so glad, before or since,
as on the day when it was all over, and I found myself a free man again.
I suffered only in thinking how I had fooled away some of the best
years of my life for a woman who despised me from the first, and was as
heartless as the stones of the street. I found her in beggary, or close
upon it. I made myself her slave--it's only the worthless women who
accept from a man, who expect from him, such slavish worship as she had
from me. I gave her clothing; she scarcely thanked me, but I thought
myself happy. I gave her a comfortable home, such as she hadn't
known for years; for a reward she mocked at my plain tastes and quiet
ways--but I thought no ill of it--could see nothing in it but a girlish,
lighthearted sort of way that seemed one of her merits. As long as we
lived together, she pretended to be an affectionate wife; I should
think no one ever matched her in hypocrisy. But the first chance she
had--husband, children, home, all flung aside in a moment. Then I saw
her in the true light, and understood all at once what a blind fool I
had been.'

He breathed quickly and painfully. Mary sat without a movement.

'I thought I had done a great thing in marrying a wife that was born
above me. Her father had been a country gentleman; horse-racing and
such things had brought him down, and from her twelfth year his daughter
lived--I never quite knew how, but on charity of some kind. She grew up
without trying to earn her own living; she thought herself too good for
that, thought she had a claim to be supported, because as a child she
was waited upon by servants. When I asked her once if she couldn't have
done something, she stared at me and laughed in my face. For all that
she was glad enough to marry a man of my sort--rough and uneducated as
I was. She always reminded me of it, though--that I had no education;
I believe she thought that she had a perfect right to throw over such
a husband, whenever she chose. Afterwards, I saw very well that _her_
education didn't amount to much. How could it, when she learnt nothing
after she was twelve? She was living with very poor people who came from
my part of the country--that's how I met her. The father led some sort
of blackguard life in London, but had no money for her, nor yet for his
other girl, who went into service, I was told, and perhaps made herself
a useful, honest woman. He died in a hospital, and he was buried at my
expense--not three months before his daughter went off and left me.'

'You will never tell your children,' said Mary, when there had been a
long pause.

'I've often thought it would only be right if I told them. I've often
thought, the last year or two, that Nancy ought to know. It might make
her think, and do her good.'

'No, no,' returned the other hurriedly. 'Never let her know of
it--never. It might do her much harm.'

'You know now, Mary, why I look at the girl so anxiously. She's not like
her mother; not much like her in face, and I can't think she's like her
in heart. But you know what her faults are as well as I do. Whether I've
been right or wrong in giving her a good education, I shall never know.
Wrong, I fear--but I've told you all about that.'

'You don't know whether she's alive or not?' asked Mary, when once more
it was left to her to break silence.

'What do I care? How should I know?'

'Don't be tempted to tell them--either of them!' said the other
earnestly.

'My friend Barmby knows. Whether he's told his son, I can't say; it's
twenty years since we spoke about it. If he _did_ ever mention it to
Samuel, then it might somehow get known to Horace or the girl, when I'm
gone.--I won't give up the hope that young Barmby may be her husband.
She'll have time to think about it. But if ever she should come to you
and ask questions--I mean, if she's been told what happened--you'll set
me right in her eyes? You'll tell her what I've told you?'

'I hope it may never--'

'So do I,' Stephen interrupted, his voice husky with fatigue. 'But
I count on you to make my girl think rightly of me, if ever there's
occasion. I count on you. When I'm dead, I won't have her think that I
was to blame for her mother's ill-doing. That's why I've told you. You
believe me, don't you?'

And Mary, lifting her eyes, met his look of appeal with more than a
friend's confidence.



CHAPTER 2



From chambers in Staple Inn, Lionel Tarrant looked forth upon the
laborious world with a dainty enjoyment of his own limitless leisure.
The old gables fronting upon Holborn pleased his fancy; he liked to pass
under the time-worn archway, and so, at a step, estrange himself from
commercial tumult,--to be in the midst of modern life, yet breathe an
atmosphere of ancient repose.

He belonged to an informal club of young men who called themselves,
facetiously, the Hodiernals. _Vixi hodie_! The motto, suggested by some
one or other after a fifth tumbler of whisky punch, might bear more than
a single interpretation. Harvey Munden, the one member of this genial
brotherhood who lived by the sweat of his brow, proposed as a more
suitable title, Les Faineants; that, however, was judged pedantic,
not to say offensive. For these sons of the Day would not confess to
indolence; each deemed himself, after his own fashion, a pioneer in art,
letters, civilisation. They had money of their own, or were supported by
some one who could afford that privilege; most of them had, ostensibly,
some profession in view; for the present, they contented themselves with
living, and the weaker brethren read in their hodiernity an obligation
to be 'up to date.'

Tarrant professed himself critical of To-day, apprehensive of To-morrow;
he cast a backward eye. None the less, his avowed principle was to
savour the passing hour. When night grew mellow, and the god of whisky
inspired his soul, he shone in a lyrical egoism which had but slight
correspondence with the sincerities of his solitude. His view of
woman--the Hodiernals talked much of woman--differed considerably from
his thoughts of the individual women with whom he associated; protesting
oriental sympathies, he nourished in truth the chivalry appropriate to
his years and to his education, and imaged an ideal of female excellence
whereof the prime features were moral and intellectual.

He had no money of his own. What could be saved for him from
his father's squandered estate--the will established him sole
inheritor--went in the costs of a liberal education, his grandmother
giving him assurance that he should not go forth into the world
penniless. This promise Mrs. Tarrant had kept, though not exactly in the
manner her grandson desired. Instead of making him a fixed allowance,
the old lady supplied him with funds at uncertain intervals; with the
unpleasant result that it was sometimes necessary for him to call to her
mind his dependent condition. The cheques he received varied greatly in
amount,--from handsome remittances of a hundred pounds or so, down to
minim gifts which made the young man feel uncomfortable when he received
them. Still, he was provided for, and it could not be long before this
dependency came to an end.

He believed in his own abilities. Should it ever be needful, he could
turn to journalism, for which, undoubtedly, he had some aptitude. But
why do anything at all, in the sense of working for money? Every year he
felt less disposed for that kind of exertion, and had a greater relish
of his leisurely life. Mrs. Tarrant never rebuked him; indeed she had
long since ceased to make inquiry about his professional views. Perhaps
she felt it something of a dignity to have a grandson who lived as
gentleman at large.

But now, in the latter days of August, the gentleman found himself, in
one most important particular, at large no longer. On returning
from Teignmouth to Staple Inn he entered his rooms with a confused,
disagreeable sense that things were not as they had been, that his
freedom had suffered a violation, that he could not sit down among
his books with the old self-centred ease, that his prospects were
completely, indescribably changed, perchance much for the worse. In
brief, Tarrant had gone forth a bachelor, and came back a married man.

Could it be sober fact? Had he in very deed committed so gross an
absurdity?

He had purposed no such thing. Miss. Nancy Lord was not by any means the
kind of person that entered his thoughts when they turned to marriage.
He regarded her as in every respect his inferior. She belonged to the
social rank only just above that of wage-earners; her father had a small
business in Camberwell; she dressed and talked rather above her station,
but so, now-a-days, did every daughter of petty tradesfolk. From
the first he had amused himself with her affectation of intellectual
superiority. Miss. Lord represented a type; to study her as a sample of
the pretentious half-educated class was interesting; this sort of girl
was turned out in thousands every year, from so-called High Schools;
if they managed to pass some examination or other, their conceit grew
boundless. Craftily, he had tested her knowledge; it seemed all sham.
She would marry some hapless clerk, and bring him to bankruptcy by the
exigencies of her 'refinement.'

So had he thought of Nancy till a few months ago. But in the
spring-time, when his emotions blossomed with the blossoming year, he
met the girl after a long interval, and saw her with changed eyes. She
had something more than prettiness; her looks undeniably improved. It
seemed, too, that she bore herself more gracefully, and even talked
with, at times, an approximation to the speech of a lady. These
admissions signified much in a man of Tarrant's social prejudice--so
strong that it exercised an appreciable effect upon his every-day
morals. He began to muse about Miss. Lord, and the upshot of his musing
was that, having learnt of her departure for Teignmouth, he idly betook
himself in the same direction.

But as for marriage, he would as soon have contemplated taking to wife a
barmaid. Between Miss. Lord and the young lady who dispenses refreshment
there were distinctions, doubtless, but none of the first importance.
Then arose the question, in what spirit, with what purpose, did he seek
her intimacy? The answer he simply postponed.

And postponed it very late indeed. Until the choice was no longer
between making love in idleness, and conscientiously holding aloof;
but between acting like a frank blackguard, and making the amends of an
honest man.

The girl's fault, to be sure. He had not credited himself with this
power of fascination, and certainly not with the violence of passion
which recklessly pursues indulgence. Still, the girl's fault; she had
behaved--well, as a half-educated girl of her class might be expected
to behave. Ignorance she could not plead; that were preposterous. Utter
subjugation by first love; that, perhaps; she affirmed it, and possibly
with truth; a flattering assumption, at all events. But, all said and
done, the issue had been of her own seeking. Why, then, accuse himself
of blackguardly conduct, if he had turned a deaf ear to her pleading?
Not one word of marriage had previously escaped his lips, nor anything
that could imply a promise.

Well, there was the awkward and unaccountable fact that he _felt_
himself obliged to marry her; that, when he seemed to be preparing
resistance, downright shame rendered it impossible. Her face--her
face when she looked at him and spoke! The truth was, that he had not
hesitated at all; there was but one course open to him. He gave glances
in the other direction; he wished to escape; he reviled himself for his
folly; he saw the difficulties and discontents that lay before him; but
choice he had none.

Love, in that sense of the word which Tarrant respected, could not be
said to influence him. He had uttered the word; yes, of course he had
uttered it; as a man will who is goaded by his raging blood. But he was
as far as ever from loving Nancy Lord. Her beauty, and a certain growing
charm in her companionship, had lured him on; his habitual idleness,
and the vagueness of his principles, made him guilty at last of what a
moralist would call very deliberate rascality. He himself was inclined
to see his behaviour in that light; yet why had Nancy so smoothed the
path of temptation?

That _her_ love was love indeed, he might take for granted. To a certain
point, it excused her. But she seemed so thoroughly able to protect
herself; the time of her green girlhood had so long gone by. For
explanation, he must fall back again on the circumstances of her origin
and training. Perhaps she illustrated a social peril, the outcome of
modern follies. Yes, that was how he would look at it. A result of
charlatan 'education' operating upon crude character.

Who could say what the girl had been reading, what cheap philosophies
had unsettled her mind? Is not a little knowledge a dangerous thing?

Thus far had he progressed in the four and twenty hours which followed
his--or Nancy's--conquest. Meanwhile he had visited the office of the
registrar, had made his application for a marriage licence, a proceeding
which did not tend to soothe him. Later, when he saw Nancy again, he
experienced a revival of that humaner mood which accompanied his pledge
to marry her, the mood of regret, but also of tenderness, of compassion.
A tenderness that did not go very deep, a half-slighting compassion. His
character, and the features of the case, at present allowed no more; but
he preferred the kindlier attitude.

Of course he preferred it. Was he not essentially good-natured? Would he
not, at any ordinary season, go out of his way to do a kindness? Did
not his soul revolt against every form of injustice? Whom had he ever
injured? For his humanity, no less than for his urbanity, he claimed a
noteworthy distinction among young men of the time.

And there lay the pity of it. But for Nancy's self-abandonment, he might
have come to love her in good earnest. As it was, the growth of their
intimacy had been marked with singular, unanticipated impulses on
his side, impulses quite inconsistent with heartless scheming. In the
compunctious visitings which interrupted his love-making at least twice,
there was more than a revolt of mere honesty, as he recognised during
his brief flight to London. Had she exercised but the common prudence of
womanhood!

Why, that she did not, might tell both for and against her. Granting
that she lacked true dignity, native refinement, might it not have been
expected that artfulness would supply their place? Artful fencing
would have stamped her of coarse nature. But coarseness she had never
betrayed; he had never judged her worse than intellectually shallow. Her
self-surrender might, then, indicate a trait worthy of admiration. Her
subsequent behaviour undeniably pleaded for respect. She acquainted
him with the circumstances of her home life, very modestly, perhaps
pathetically. He learnt that her father was not ill to do, heard of her
domestic and social troubles, that her mother had been long dead, things
weighing in her favour, to be sure.

If only she had loved him less!

It was all over; he was married. In acting honourably, it seemed
probable that he had spoilt his life. He must be prepared for anything.
Nancy said that she should not, could not, tell her father, yet awhile;
but that resolution was of doubtful stability. For his own part, he
thought it clearly advisable that the fact should not become known at
Champion Hill; but could he believe Nancy's assurance that Miss. Morgan
remained in the dark? Upon one catastrophe, others might naturally
follow.

Here, Saturday at noon, came a letter of Nancy's writing. A long letter,
and by no means a bad one; superior, in fact, to anything he thought
she could have written. It moved him somewhat, but would have moved him
more, had he not been legally bound to the writer. On Sunday she could
not come to see him; but on Monday, early in the afternoon--

Well, there were consolations. A wise man makes the best of the
inevitable.



CHAPTER 3



Since his return he had seen no one, and none of his friends knew where
he had been. A call from some stray Hodiernal would be very unseasonable
this Monday afternoon; but probably they were all enjoying their elegant
leisure in regions remote from town. As the hour of Nancy's arrival drew
near, he sat trying to compose himself--with indifferent success. At
one moment his thoughts found utterance, and he murmured in a strange,
bewildered tone--'My wife.' Astonishing words! He laughed at their
effect upon him, but unmirthfully. And his next murmur was--'The devil!'
A mere ejaculation, betokening his state of mind.

He reached several times for his pipe, and remembered when he had
touched it that the lips with which he greeted Nancy ought not to be
redolent of tobacco. In outward respect, at all events, he would not
fall short.

Just when his nervousness was becoming intolerable, there sounded a
knock. The knock he had anticipated--timid, brief. He stepped hastily
from the room, and opened. Nancy hardly looked at him, and neither of
them spoke till the closing of two doors had assured their privacy.

'Well, you had no difficulty in finding the place?'

'No--none at all.'

They stood apart, and spoke with constraint. Nancy's bosom heaved, as
though she had been hastening overmuch; her face was deeply coloured;
her eyes had an unwonted appearance, resembling those of a night-watcher
at weary dawn. She cast quick glances about the room, but with
the diffidence of an intruder. Her attitude was marked by the same
characteristic; she seemed to shrink, to be ashamed.

'Come and sit down,' said Tarrant cheerfully, as he wheeled a chair.

She obeyed him, and he, stooping beside her, offered his lips. Nancy
kissed him, closing her eyes for the moment, then dropping them again.

'It seems a long time, Nancy--doesn't it?'

'Yes--a very long time.'

'You couldn't come on Sunday?'

'I found my father very ill. I didn't like to leave home till to-day.'

'Your father ill?--You said nothing of it in your letter.'

'No--I didn't like to--with the other things.'

A singular delicacy this; Tarrant understood it, and looked at her
thoughtfully. Again she was examining the room with hurried glance;
upon him her eyes did not turn. He asked questions about Mr. Lord. Nancy
could not explain the nature of his illness; he had spoken of gout, but
she feared it must be something worse; the change in him since she went
away was incredible and most alarming. This she said in short, quick
sentences, her voice low. Tarrant thought to himself that in her too,
a very short time had made a very notable change; he tried to read its
significance, but could reach no certainty.

'I'm sorry to hear all this--very sorry. You must tell me more about
your father. Take off your hat, dear, and your gloves.'

Her gloves she removed first, and laid them on her lap; Tarrant took
them away. Then her hat; this too he placed on the table. Having done
so, he softly touched the plaits of her hair. And, for the first time,
Nancy looked up at him.

'Are you glad to see me?' she asked, in a voice that seemed subdued by
doubt of the answer.

'I am--very glad.'

His hand fell to her shoulder. With a quick movement, a stifled
exclamation, the girl rose and flung her arms about him.

'Are you really glad?--Do you really love me?'

'Never doubt it, dear girl.'

'Ah, but I can't help. I have hardly slept at night, in trying to get
rid of the doubt. When you opened the door, I felt you didn't welcome
me. Don't you think of me as a burden? I can't help wondering why I am
here.'

He took hold of her left hand, and looked at it, then said playfully:

'Of course you wonder. What business has a wife to come and see her
husband without the ring on her finger?'

Nancy turned from him, opened the front of her dress, unknotted a string
of silk, and showed her finger bright with the golden circlet.

'That's how I must wear it, except when I am with you. I keep
touching--to make sure it's there.'

Tarrant kissed her fingers.

'Dear,'--she had her face against him--'make me certain that you love
me. Speak to me like you did before. Oh, I never knew in my life what it
was to feel ashamed!'

'Ashamed? Because you are married, Nancy?'

'Am I really married? That seems impossible. It's like having dreamt
that I was married to you. I can hardly remember a thing that happened.'

'The registry at Teignmouth remembers,' he answered with a laugh. 'Those
books have a long memory.'

She raised her eyes.

'But wouldn't you undo it if you could?--No, no, I don't mean that. Only
that if it had never happened--if we had said good-bye before those last
days--wouldn't you have been glad now?'

'Why, that's a difficult question to answer,' he returned gently. 'It
all depends on your own feeling.'

For whatever reason, these words so overcame Nancy that she burst into
tears. Tarrant, at once more lover-like, soothed and fondled her, and
drew her to sit on his knee.

'You're not like your old self, dear girl. Of course, I can understand
it. And your father's illness. But you mustn't think of it in this way.
I do love you, Nancy. I couldn't unsay a word I said to you--I don't
wish anything undone.'

'Make me believe that. I think I should be quite happy then. It's the
hateful thought that perhaps you never wanted me for your wife; it
_will_ come, again and again, and it makes me feel as if I would rather
have died.'

'Send such thoughts packing. Tell them your husband wants all your heart
and mind for himself.'

'But will you never think ill of me?'

She whispered the words, close-clinging.

'I should be a contemptible sort of brute.'

'No. I ought to have--. If we had spoken of our love to each other, and
waited.'

'A very proper twelvemonth's engagement,--meetings at five o'clock
tea,--fifty thousand love-letters,--and all that kind of thing. Oh, we
chose a better way. Our wedding was among the leaves and flowers. You
remember the glow of evening sunlight between the red pine and the
silver birch? I hope that place may remain as it is all our lives; we
will go there--'

'Never! Never ask me to go there. I want to forget--I hope some day I
may forget.'

'If you hope so, then I will hope the same.'

'And you love me--with real, husband's love--love that will last?'

'Why should _I_ answer all the questions?' He took her face between his
hands. What if the wife's love should fail first?'

'You can say that lightly, because you know--'

'What do I know?'

'You know that I am _all_ love of you. As long as I am myself, I must
love you. It was because I had no will of my own left, because I lived
only in the thought of you day and night--'

Their lips met in a long silence.

'I mustn't stay past four o'clock,' were Nancy's next words. 'I don't
like to be away long from the house. Father won't ask me anything, but
he knows I'm away somewhere, and I'm afraid it makes him angry with me.'
She examined the room. 'How comfortable you are here! what a delightful
old place to live in!'

'Will you look at the other rooms?'

'Not to-day--when I come again. I must say good-bye very soon--oh, see
how the time goes! What a large library you have! You must let me look
at all the books, when I have time.'

'Let you? They are yours as much as mine.'

Her face brightened.

'I should like to live here; how I should enjoy it after that hateful
Grove Lane! Shall I live here with you some day?'

'There wouldn't be room for two. Why, your dresses would fill the whole
place.'

She went and stood before the shelves.

'But how dusty you are! Who cleans for you?'

'No one. A very rickety old woman draws a certain number of shillings
each week, on pretence of cleaning.'

'What a shame! She neglects you disgracefully. You shall go away some
afternoon, and leave me here with a great pile of dusters.'

'You can do that kind of thing? It never occurred to me to ask you: are
you a domestic person?'

She answered with something of the old confident air.

'That was an oversight, wasn't it? After all, how little you know about
me!'

'Do you know much more of me?'

Her countenance fell.

'You are going to tell me--everything. How long have you lived here?'

'Two years and a half.'

'And your friends come to see you here? Of course they do. I meant, have
you many friends?'

'Friends, no. A good many acquaintances.'

'Men, like yourself?'

'Mostly men, fellows who talk about art and literature.'

'And women?' Nancy faltered, half turning away.

'Oh, magnificent creatures--Greek scholars--mathematicians--all that is
most advanced!'

'That's the right answer to a silly question,' said Nancy humbly.

Whereat, Tarrant fixed his gaze upon her.

'I begin to think that--'

He checked himself awkwardly. Nancy insisted on the completion of his
thought.

'That of all the women I know, you have the most sense.'

'I had rather hear you say that than have a great fortune.' She blushed
with joy. 'Perhaps you will love me some day, as I wish to be loved.'

'How?'

'I'll tell you another time. If it weren't for my father's illness, I
think I could go home feeling almost happy. But how am I to know what
you are doing?'

'What do you wish me to do?'

'Just tell me how you live. What shall you do now, when I'm gone?'

'Sit disconsolate,'--he came nearer--'thinking you were just a little
unkind.'

'No, don't say that.' Nancy was flurried. 'I have told you the real
reason. Our housekeeper says that father was disappointed and angry
because I put off my return from Teignmouth. He spoke to me very coldly,
and I have hardly seen him since. He won't let me wait upon him; and
I have thought, since I know how ill he really is, that I must seem
heartless. I will come for longer next time.'

To make amends for the reproach he had uttered in spite of himself,
Tarrant began to relate in full the events of his ordinary day.

'I get my own breakfast--the only meal I have at home. Look, here's
the kitchen, queer old place. And here's the dining-room. Cupboards
everywhere, you see; we boast of our cupboards. The green paint is _de
rigueur_; duck's egg colour; I've got to like it. That door leads into
the bedroom. Well, after breakfast, about eleven o'clock that's to say,
I light up--look at my pipe-rack--and read newspapers. Then, if it's
fine, I walk about the streets, and see what new follies men are
perpetrating. And then--'

He told of his favourite restaurants, of his unfashionable club, of
a few houses where, at long intervals, he called or dined, of the
Hodiernals, of a dozen other small matters.

'What a life,' sighed the listener, 'compared with mine!'

'We'll remedy that, some day.'

'When?' she asked absently.

'Wait just a little.--You don't wish to tell your father?'

'I daren't tell him. I doubt whether I shall ever dare to tell him face
to face.'

'Don't think about it. Leave it to me.'

'I must have letters from you--but how? Perhaps, if you could
promise always to send them for the first post--I generally go to the
letter-box, and I could do so always--whilst father is ill.'

This was agreed upon. Nancy, whilst they were talking, took her hat from
the table; at the same moment, Tarrant's hand moved towards it. Their
eyes met, and the hand that would have checked her was drawn back.
Quickly, secretly, she drew the ring from her finger, hid it somewhere,
and took her gloves.

'Did you come by the back way?' Tarrant asked, when he had bitten his
lips for a sulky minute.

'Yes, as you told me.'

He said he would walk with her into Chancery Lane; there could be no
risk in it.

'You shall go out first. Any one passing will suppose you had business
with the solicitor underneath. I'll overtake you at Southampton
Buildings.'

Impatient to be gone, she lingered minute after minute, and broke
hurriedly from his restraining arms at last. The second outer door,
which Tarrant had closed on her entrance, surprised her by its
prison-like massiveness. In the wooden staircase she stopped timidly,
but at the exit her eyes turned to an inscription above, which she had
just glanced at when arriving: _Surrexit e flammis_, and a date. Nancy
had no Latin, but guessed an interpretation from the last word.
Through the little court, with its leafy plane-trees and white-worn
cobble-stones, she walked with bent head, hearing the roar of Holborn
through the front archway, and breathing more freely when she gained the
quiet garden at the back of the Inn.

Tarrant's step sounded behind her. Looking up she asked the meaning of
the inscription she had seen.

'You don't know Latin? Well, why should you? _Surrexit e flammis_, "It
rose again from the flames."

'I thought it might be something like that. You will be patient with my
ignorance?'

A strange word upon Nancy's lips. No mortal ere this had heard her
confess to ignorance.

'But you know the modern languages?' said Tarrant, smiling.

'Yes. That is, a little French and German--a very little German.'

Tarrant mused, seemingly with no dissatisfaction.



CHAPTER 4



In her brother's looks and speech Nancy detected something mysterious.
Undoubtedly he was keeping a secret from her, and there could be just as
little doubt that he would not keep it long. Whenever she questioned him
about the holiday at Scarborough, he put on a smile unlike any she
had ever seen on his face, so profoundly thoughtful was it, so loftily
reserved. On the subject of Mrs. Damerel he did not choose to be very
communicative; Nancy gathered little more than she had learnt from his
letter. But very plainly the young man held himself in higher esteem
than hitherto; very plainly he had learnt to think of 'the office' as a
burden or degradation, from which he would soon escape. Prompted by her
own tormenting conscience, his sister wondered whether Fanny French
had anything to do with the mystery; but this seemed improbable. She
mentioned Fanny's name one evening.

'Do you see much of her?'

'Not much,' was the dreamy reply. 'When are you going to call?'

'Oh, not at present,' said Nancy.

'You've altered again, then?'

She vouchsafed no answer.

'There's something I think I ought to tell you,' said Horace, speaking
as though he were the elder and felt a responsibility. 'People have been
talking about you and Mr. Crewe.'

'What!' She flashed into excessive anger. 'Who has been talking?'

'The people over there. Of course I know it's all nonsense. At
least'--he raised his eyebrows--'I suppose it is.'

'_I_ should suppose so,' said Nancy, with vehement scorn.

Their father's illness imposed a restraint upon trifling conversation.
Mary Woodruff, now attending upon Mr. Lord under the doctor's
directions, had held grave talk with Nancy. The Barmbys, father and
son, called frequently, and went away with gloomy faces. Nancy and her
brother were summoned, separately, to the invalid's room at uncertain
times, but neither was allowed to perform any service for him; their
sympathy, more often than not, excited irritation; the sufferer always
seemed desirous of saying more than the few and insignificant words
which actually passed his lips, and generally, after a long silence, he
gave the young people an abrupt dismissal. With his daughter he spoke
at length, in language which awed her by its solemnity; Nancy could only
understand him as meaning that his end drew near. He had been reviewing,
he said, the course of her life, and trying to forecast her future.

'I give you no more advice; it would only be repeating what I have said
hundreds of times. All I can _do_ for your good, I have done. You will
understand me better if you live a few more years, and I think, in the
end, you will be grateful to me.'

Nancy, sitting by the bedside, laid a hand upon her father's and sobbed.
She entreated him to believe that even now she understood how wisely he
had guided her.

'Tried to, Nancy; tried to, my dear. Guidance isn't for young people
now-a-days. Don't let us shirk the truth. I have never been satisfied
with you, but I have loved you--'

'And I you, dear father--I have! I have!--I know better now how good
your advice was. I wish--far, far more sincerely than you think--that
I had kept more control upon myself--thought less of myself in every
way--'

Whilst she spoke through her tears, the yellow, wrinkled face upon the
pillow, with its sunken eyes and wasted lips, kept sternly motionless.

'If you won't mock at me,' Stephen pursued, 'I will show you an example
you would do well to imitate. It is our old servant, now my kindest,
truest friend. If I could hope that you will let her be _your_ friend,
it would help to put my mind at rest. Don't look down upon her,--that's
such a poor way of thinking. Of all the women I have known, she is the
best. Don't be too proud to learn from her, Nancy. In all these twenty
years that she has been in my house, whatever she undertook to do, she
did well;--nothing too hard or too humble for her, if she thought it her
duty. I know what that means; I myself have been a poor, weak creature,
compared with her. Don't be offended because I ask you to take pattern
by her. I know her value now better than I ever knew it before. I owe
her a debt I can't pay.'

Nancy left the room burdened with strange and distressful thoughts. When
she saw Mary she looked at her with new feelings, and spoke to her less
familiarly than of wont. Mary was very silent in these days; her face
had the dignity of a profound unspoken grief.

To his son, Mr. Lord talked only of practical things, urging sound
advice, and refraining, now, from any mention of their differences.
Horace, absorbed in preoccupations, had never dreamt that this illness
might prove fatal; on finding Nancy in tears, he was astonished.

'Do you think it's dangerous?' he asked.

'I'm afraid he will never get well.'

It was Sunday morning. The young man went apart and pondered. After the
mid-day meal, having heard from Mary that his father was no worse, he
left home without remark to any one, and from Camberwell Green took a
cab to Trafalgar Square. At the Hotel Metropole he inquired for Mrs.
Damerel; her rooms were high up, and he ascended by the lift. Sunk in a
deep chair, her feet extended upon a hassock, Mrs. Damerel was amusing
herself with a comic paper; she rose briskly, though with the effort of
a person who is no longer slim.

'Here I am, you see!--up in the clouds. Now, _did_ you get my letter?'

'No letter, but a telegram.'

'There, I thought so. Isn't that just like me? As soon as I had sent
out the letter to post, I said to myself that I had written the wrong
address. What address it _was_, I couldn't tell you, to save my life,
but I shall see when it comes back from the post-office. I rather
suspect it's gone to Gunnersbury; just then I was thinking about
somebody at Gunnersbury--or somebody at Hampstead, I can't be sure
which. What a good thing I wired!--Oh, now, Horace, I _don't_ like that,
I don't really!'

The young man looked at her in bewilderment.

'What don't you like?'

'Why, that tie. It won't do at all. Your taste is generally very good,
but that tie! I'll choose one for you to-morrow, and let you have it
