Whilst she was thus occupied, darkness came on. She did not care to
light the lamp, so made herself ready, and stole forth.

The rain had ceased. Walking alone at night was a pleasure in which
she now indulged herself pretty frequently; at such times Mary Woodruff
believed her in the company of Miss. Morgan. The marked sobriety of
her demeanour since Mr. Lord's death, and the friendliness, even the
affection, she evinced in their common life at home, had set Mary's
mind at ease concerning her. No murmur at her father's will had escaped
Nancy, in this respect very unlike her brother, who, when grief was
forgotten, declared himself ill-used; she seemed perfectly content with
the conditions laid upon her, and the sincerity of her mourning could
not be doubted. Anxious to conciliate the girl in every honest way, Mary
behaved to her with the same external respect as ever, and without a
hint of express guardianship. The two were on excellent terms. It seemed
likely that before long they would have the house to themselves; already
Horace had spoken of taking lodgings in a part of London more congruous
with the social aspirations encouraged by his aunt, Mrs. Damerel.

From Chancery Lane she passed into Fleet Street, and sauntered along
with observation of shop-windows. She was unspeakably relieved by the
events of the afternoon; it would now depend upon her own choice whether
she preserved her secret, or declared herself a married woman. Her
husband had proved himself generous as well as loving; yes, she repeated
to herself, generous and loving; her fears and suspicions had
been baseless. Mrs. Tarrant's death freed them from all sordid
considerations. A short time, perhaps a day or two, might put an end to
irregularities, and enable her to hold up her head once more.

Feeling hungry, she entered a restaurant, and dined. Not carelessly, but
with fastidious choice of viands. This was enjoyable; she began to look
more like herself of a few months ago.

She would return to Camberwell by train from Ludgate Hill. At the
circus, crowding traffic held her back for a minute or two; just as
she ran forward, a familiar voice caused her to stop again. She became
flurried, lost her head, stood still amid a tumult of omnibuses, cabs
and carts; but a hand grasped her by the arm, and led her safely to the
opposite pavement.

'What do you mean by shouting at me in the street?' were her first
words.

The person addressed was Luckworth Crewe; he had by no means anticipated
such wrathful greeting, and stood in confusion.

'I beg your pardon, Miss. Lord. I didn't think I shouted. I only meant
to call your attention.'

'Why should you call my attention?' Her cheeks were flushed with anger;
she regarded him as though he were a stranger guilty of mere insolence.
'I don't wish to speak to you.'

With astonishment, Crewe found himself alone. But a rebuff such as this,
so irrational as he thought it, so entirely out of keeping with Miss.
Lord's behaviour, he could by no means accept. Nancy was walking towards
the railway-station; he followed. He watched her as she took a ticket,
then put himself in her way, with all the humility of countenance he
could command.

'I'm so sorry I offended you. It wasn't the right thing to do; I ought
to have waited till you were across. I'm a blundering sort of fellow in
those things. Do let me beg your pardon, and forgive me.'

She was calmer now, though still tremulous. But for the attack of
nervousness, she would have met Crewe with nothing worse than a slight
reserve, to mark a change in their relations. Very soon after her
father's death he had written a becoming letter, though it smacked of
commercial phraseology. To the hope expressed in it, that he might be
allowed to call upon her in a few weeks' time, Nancy made no reply. A
fortnight later he wrote again, this time reminding her, with modest
propriety, of what had occurred between them before she left town in
August. Nancy responded, and in grave, friendly language, begged him to
think of her no more; he must not base the slightest hope upon anything
she might have said. To her surprise, Crewe held his peace, and she saw
him now for the first time since their ascent of the Monument.

'I'm ashamed that I lost my temper, Mr. Crewe. I am in a hurry to get
home.'

In the booking-office at Ludgate Hill it is not easy to detain, by
chivalrous discourse, a lady bent on escaping; but Crewe attempted it.
He subdued his voice, spoke rapidly and with emotion, implored that he
might be heard for a moment. Would she not permit him to call upon her?
He had waited, respecting her seclusion. He asked for nothing whatever
but permission to call, as any acquaintance might.

'Have you heard I have opened an office in Farringdon Street? I should
so like to tell you all about it--what I'm doing--'

'No one calls to see me,' said Nancy, with firmness. 'I wish to live
quite alone. I'm very sorry to seem unfriendly.'

'Is it anything I've done?'

'No--nothing whatever. I assure you, nothing. Let us say good-bye; I
can't stop another moment.'

They shook hands and so parted.

'You're back early,' said Mary, when Nancy entered the drawing-room.

'Yes. I left Jessica to her books sooner than usual. The examination
draws near.'

Quiet, sad, diligent ever, Mary kept unchanged the old domestic routine.
There was the same perfect order, the same wholesome economy, as when
she worked under the master's eyes. Nancy had nothing to do but enjoy
the admirable care with which she was surrounded; she took it all as a
matter of course, never having considered the difference between her own
home and those of her acquaintances.

Horace had dined, and was gone out again. They talked of him; Mary said
that he had spoken of moving into lodgings very soon.

'Of course he doesn't tell us everything,' said Nancy. 'I feel pretty
sure that he's going to leave the office, but how he means to live I
don't understand. Perhaps Mrs. Damerel will give him money, or lend it
him. I only hope she may break it off between him and Fanny.'

'Hasn't he told you that Fanny is often with Mrs. Damerel?'

'With her?' Nancy exclaimed. 'He never said a word of it to me.'

'He said so to me this evening, and laughed when I looked surprised.'

'Well then, I don't pretend to understand what's going on. We can't do
anything.'

About nine o'clock the servant entered the room, bringing Miss. Lord a
note, which had just been left by a cab-driver. Nancy, seeing that the
address was in Tarrant's hand, opened it with a flutter of joy; such
a proceeding as this, openly sending a note by a messenger, could
only mean that her husband no longer cared to preserve secrecy. To her
astonishment, the envelope contained but a hurried line.

'Not a word yet to any one. Without fail, come to-morrow afternoon, at
four.'

With what show of calmness she could command, she looked up at her
companion.

'The idea of his sending in this way! It's that Mr. Crewe I've told
you of. I met him as I was coming home, and had to speak to him rather
sharply to get rid of him. Here comes his apology, foolish man!'

Living in perpetual falsehood, Nancy felt no shame at a fiction such as
this. Mere truth-telling had never seemed to her a weighty matter of
the law. And she was now grown expert in lies. But Tarrant's
message disturbed her gravely. Something unforeseen must have
happened--something, perhaps, calamitous. She passed a miserable night.

When she ascended the stairs at Staple Inn, next afternoon, it wanted
ten minutes to four. As usual at her coming, the outer door stood open,
exposing the door with the knocker. She had just raised her hand,
when, with a sound of voices from inside, the door opened, and Tarrant
appeared in company with a stranger. Terror-stricken, she stepped back.
Tarrant, after a glance, paid no attention to her.

'All right,' he was saying to his friend, 'I shall see you in a day or
two. Good-bye, old man.'

The stranger had observed Nancy, but withheld his eyes from her, and
quickly vanished down the stairs.

'Who was that?' she whispered.

'I told you four o'clock.'

'It is four.'

'No--ten minutes to at least. It doesn't matter, but if you had been
punctual you wouldn't have had a fright.'

Nancy had dropped into a chair, white and shaking. Tarrant's voice,
abruptly reproachful, affected her scarcely less than the preceding
shock. In the struggle to recover herself she sobbed and choked, and at
length burst into tears. Tarrant spoke impatiently.

'What's the matter? Surely you are not so childish'--

She stood up, and went into the bedroom, where she remained for several
minutes, returning at length without her jacket, but with her hat still
on.

'I couldn't help it; and you shouldn't speak to me in that way. I have
felt ill all the morning.'

Looking at her, the young man said to himself, that love was one thing,
wedded life another. He could make allowance for Nancy's weakness--but
it was beyond his power to summon the old warmth and tenderness. If
henceforth he loved her, it must be with husband's love--a phrase which
signified to him something as distinct as possible from the ardour he
had known; a moral attachment instead of a passionate desire.

And there was another reason for his intolerant mood.

'You hadn't spoken to any one before you got my note?'

'No.--Why are you treating me like this? Are you ashamed that your
friend saw me?'

'Ashamed? not at all.'

'Who did he think I was?'

'I don't know. He doesn't know anything about you, at all events. As you
may guess, I have something not very pleasant to tell. I didn't mean
to be unkind; it was only the surprise at seeing you when I opened the
door. I had calculated the exact time. But never mind. You look cold;
warm yourself at the fire. You shall drink a glass of wine; it will put
your nerves right again.'

'No, I want nothing. Tell me at once what it is.'

But Tarrant quietly brought a bottle and glass from his cupboard. Nancy
again refused, pettishly.

'Until you have drunk,' he said, with a smile of self-will, 'I shall
tell you nothing.'

'I don't know what I've done to make you like this.'

Her sobs and tears returned. After a moment of impatience, Tarrant went
up to her with the glass, laid a hand upon her shoulder, and kissed her.

'Now, come, be reasonable. We have uncommonly serious things to talk
about.'

'What did your friend think of me?'

'That you were one of the prettiest girls he had ever been privileged
to see, and that I was an enviable fellow to have such a visitor. There
now, another sip, and let us have some colour back into your cheeks.
There's bad news, Nancy; confoundedly bad news, dear girl. My
grandmother was dead when I got there. Well, the foolish old woman has
been muddling her affairs for a long time, speculating here and there
without taking any one's advice, and so on; and the result is that she
leaves nothing at all.'

Nancy was mute.

'Less than nothing, indeed. She owed a few hundreds that she had
no means of paying. The joke of the thing is, that she has left an
elaborate will, with legacies to half-a-dozen people, myself first of
all. If she had been so good as to die two years ago, I should have come
in for a thousand a year or so. No one suspected what was going on; she
never allowed Vawdrey, the one man who could have been useful to her,
to have an inkling of the affair. An advertising broker got her in his
clutches. Vawdrey's lawyer has been going through her papers, and finds
everything quite intelligible. The money has gone in lumps, good after
bad. Swindling, of course, but perfectly legal swindling, nothing to
be done about it. A minute or two before her death she gasped out some
words of revelation to the nurse, enough to set Vawdrey on the track,
when he was told.'

Still the listener said nothing.

'Well, I had a talk with Vawdrey. He's a blackguard, but not a bad
fellow. Wished he could help me, but didn't quite see how, unless I
would go into business. However, he had a suggestion to make.'

For Nancy, the pause was charged with apprehensions. She seemed to
discover in her husband's face a purpose which he knew would excite her
resistance.

'He and I have often talked about my friend Sutherland, in the Bahamas,
and Vawdrey has an idea that there'll be a profitable opening in that
quarter, before long. Sutherland has written to me lately that he thinks
of bestirring himself in the projects I've told you about; he has got
the old man's consent to borrow money on the property. Now Vawdrey,
naturally enough, would like Sutherland to join him in starting a
company; the thoughts of such men run only on companies. So he offers,
if I will go out to the Bahamas for a month or two, and look about me,
and put myself in a position to make some kind of report--he offers to
pay my expenses. Of course if the idea came to anything, and a company
got floated, I should have shares.'

Again he paused. The listener had wide, miserable eyes.

'Well, I told him at once that I would accept the proposal. I have no
right to refuse. All I possess in the world, at this moment, is about
sixty pounds. If I sold all my books and furniture, they might bring
another sixty or so. What, then, is to become of me? I must set to work
at something, and here's the first work that comes to hand. But,' his
voice softened, 'this puts us face to face with a very grave question;
doesn't it? Are we to relinquish your money, and be both of us
penniless? Or is there any possibility of saving it?'

'How _can_ we? How could the secret be kept?'

Voice and countenance joined in utter dismay.

'It doesn't seem to me,' said Tarrant slowly, 'a downright
impossibility. It _might_ be managed, with the help of your friend Mary,
and granting that you yourself have the courage. But'--he made a large
gesture--'of course I can't exact any such thing of you. It must seem
practicable to you yourself.'

'What are we to do if my money is lost?'

'Don't say _we_.' He smiled generously, perhaps too generously. 'A man
must support his wife. I shall arrange it somehow, of course, so that
_you_ have no anxiety. But--'

His voice dropped.

'Lionel!' She sprang up and approached him as he stood by the fireplace.
'You won't leave me, dear? How can you think of going so far away--for
months--and leaving me as I am now? Oh, you won't leave me!'

He arched his eyebrows, and smiled gently.

'If that's how you look at it--well, I must stay.'

'You can do something here,' Nancy continued, with rapid pleading. 'You
can write for the papers. You always said you could--yes, you did
say so. We don't need very much to live upon--at first. I shall be
content--'

'A moment. You mean that the money must be abandoned.'

She had meant it, but under his look her confused thoughts took a new
direction.

'No. We needn't lose it. Only stay near me, and I will keep the secret,
through everything. You will only need, then, just to support yourself,
and that is so easy. I will tell Mary how it is. She can be trusted, I
am sure she can. She would do anything for me. She knows that father was
not thinking of a man such as you. It would be cruelly wrong if I lost
everything. I will tell her, and she will help me. Scarcely any one
comes to the house, as it is; and I will pretend to have bad health, and
shut myself up. And then, when the time comes, Mary will go away with
me, and--and the child shall be taken care of by some people we can
trust to be kind to it. Horace is going to live in lodgings; and Mrs.
Damerel, I am sure, won't come to see me again; and I can get rid of
other people. The Barmbys shall think I am sulking about the will; I'm
sure they think already that I dislike them because of it. Let them
think it; I will refuse, presently, to see them at all. It's only a few
months. If I tell people I'm not well, nobody will feel surprised if I
go away for a month or two--now--soon. Mary would go with me, of course.
I might go for December and January. Father didn't mean I was never to
have change of air. Then there would be February and March at home. And
then I might go away again till near the end of May. I'm sure we can
manage it.'

She stopped, breathless. Tarrant, who had listened with averted face,
turned and spoke judicially.

'There's one thing you're forgetting, Nancy. Do you propose that we
shall never acknowledge the child? Remember that even if you were bold
enough, after our second marriage, to acknowledge it in the face of
scandal--that wouldn't be safe. Any one, if suspicion is aroused, can
find out when we were actually married.'

'We can't think of that. The child may not live.'

Tarrant moved, and the movement startled Nancy. It meant that she had
pained him, perhaps made him think of her with repugnance.

'I hardly know what I am saying. You know I don't wish that. But all I
can think of now is to keep you near me. I can't bear to be separated
from you. I love you so much more than you love me.'

'Let me just tell you what I had in mind, Nancy. Supposing the secret
can be kept, we must eventually live abroad, that is to say, if our
child is not to grow up a stranger to us, which neither you nor I could
wish. Now, at Nassau, the capital of the Bahamas, a lot of Americans
always spend the winter. If I made acquaintances among them, it might be
a very useful step, it would be preparing for the future.'

To Nancy this sounded far from convincing. She argued against it in
a perfectly natural way, and as any one else would have done who knew
Tarrant. More than once he had declared to her that he would rather die
than drag out his life in one of the new countries, that he could
not breathe in an atmosphere of commercialism unrelieved by historic
associations. Nancy urged that it would be better to make a home on
the continent, whither they could go, at any moment, without a sense of
exile.

'So it comes to this,' he interrupted, with an air of resignation.
'I must refuse Vawdrey's offer, and, in doing so, refuse an excellent
chance of providing for our future, _if_--what is by no means
improbable--the secret should be discovered. I must turn to journalism,
or be a clerk. Well and good. My wife decrees it.'

And he began to hum an air, as if the matter were dismissed. There was a
long silence.

'How long would you be away?' murmured Nancy, at length.

'I suppose two months at most.'

'November--December.'

'The second of those months you might be spending, as you said, away
from London. Down in Devon, perhaps. I can't blame your thoughts about
it; but it seems--doesn't it?--a trifle inconsiderate, when you think
what may result from my journey.'

'Would you promise me to be back by the end of the year?'

'Not promise, Nancy. But do my best. Letters take fourteen days, that's
all. You should hear by every mail.'

'Why not promise?'

'Because I can't foresee how much I may have to do there, and how
long it will take me. But you may be very sure that Vawdrey won't pay
expenses for longer than he can help. It has occurred to me that I might
get materials for some magazine articles. That would help to float me
with the editors, you know, if it's necessary.'

Nancy sighed.

'If I consented--if I did my best not to stand in your way--would you
love me better when you came back?'

The answer was a pleased laugh.

'Why, there,' he cried, 'you've given in a nutshell the whole duty of a
wife who wishes to be loved!'

Nancy tried to laugh with him.



CHAPTER 8



He must be a strong man whom the sudden stare of Penury does not daunt
and, in some measure, debase. Tarrant, whatever the possibilities of his
nature, had fallen under a spell of indolent security, which declared
its power only when he came face to face with the demand for vigorous
action. The moment found him a sheer poltroon. 'What! Is it possible
that I--_I_--am henceforth penniless? I, to whom the gods were so
gracious? I, without warning, flung from sheltered comfort on to the
bare road side, where I must either toil or beg?' The thing seemed
unintelligible. He had never imagined such ruin of his hopes.

For the first time, he turned anxious thoughts upon the money to which
his wife was--would be--might be--entitled. He computed the chances of
success in the deception he and she were practising, and knew with
shame that he must henceforth be party to a vulgar fraud. Could Nancy
be trusted to carry through this elaborate imposition--difficult for the
strongest-minded woman? Was it not a certainty that some negligence, or
some accident, must disclose her secret? Then had he a wife and child
upon his hands, to support even as common men support wife and child, by
incessant labour. The prospect chilled him.

If he went to the West Indies, his absence would heighten the
probability of Nancy's detection. Yet he desired to escape from her.
Not to abandon her; of that thought he was incapable; but to escape
the duty--repulsive to his imagination--of encouraging her through the
various stages of their fraud. From the other side of the Atlantic he
would write affectionate, consolatory letters; face to face with her,
could he support the show of tenderness, go through an endless series of
emotional interviews, always reminding himself that the end in view was
hard cash? Not for love's sake; he loved her less than before she proved
herself his wife in earnest. Veritable love--no man knew better--would
have impelled him to save himself and her from a degrading position.

Was he committing himself to a criminality which the law would visit?
Hardly that--until he entered into possession of money fraudulently
obtained.

In miserable night-watchings, he fell to the most sordid calculations.
Supposing their plot revealed, would Nancy in fact be left without
resources? Surely not,--with her brother, her aunt, her lifelong friends
the Barmbys, to take thought for her. She could not suffer extremities.
And upon this he blushed relief.

Better to make up his mind that the secret must inevitably out. For the
moment, Nancy believed she had resigned herself to his departure, and
that she had strength to go through with the long ordeal. But a woman in
her situation cannot be depended upon to pursue a consistent course. It
is Nature's ordinance that motherhood shall be attained through phases
of mental disturbance, which leave the sufferer scarce a pretence of
responsibility. Nancy would play strange pranks, by which, assuredly, he
would be driven to exasperation if they passed under his eyes. He had no
mind to be called father; perhaps even his humanity might fail under
the test to which, as a lover, he had given scarce a casual thought. By
removing himself, and awaiting the issue afar off, he gained time and
opportunity for reflection. Of course his wife could not come to want;
that, after all, was the one clearly comforting thought. Her old servant
would take good care of her, happen what might.

He must taste of liberty again before sinking into the humdrum of
married life. The thought of an ocean voyage, of the new life amid
tropic splendours, excited his imagination all the more because it
blended with the thought of recovered freedom. Marriage had come upon
him with unfair abruptness; for such a change as that, even the ordinary
bachelor demands a season preparative; much more, then, the young man
who revelled in a philosophic sense of detachment, who wrote his motto
'Vixi hodie!' For marriage he was simply unfit; forced together, he and
his wife would soon be mutually detestable. A temporary parting might
mature in the hearts of both that affection of which the seed was
undeniably planted. With passion they had done; the enduring tenderness
of a reasonable love must now unite them, were they to be united at all.
And to give such love a chance of growing in him, Tarrant felt that he
must lose sight of Nancy until her child was born.

Yes, it had begun already, the trial he dreaded. A letter from Nancy,
written and posted only an hour or two after her return home--a long,
distracted letter. Would he forgive her for seeming to be an obstacle
in the way of what he had proposed? Would he promise her to be faithful?
Would he--

He had hardly patience to read it through.

The next evening, on returning home about ten o'clock, he was startled
by the sight of Nancy's figure at the foot of his staircase.

'What has happened?'

'Nothing--don't be frightened. But I wanted to see you tonight.'

She gripped his hand.

'How long have you waited? What! Hours? But this is downright
madness--such a night as this! Couldn't you put a note for me in the
letter-box?'

'Don't--don't speak so! I wanted to see you.' She hurried her words, as
if afraid he would refuse to listen. 'I have told Mary--I wanted you to
know--'

'Come in. But there's no fire, and you're chilled through. Do you want
to be ill? What outrageous silliness!'

Her vitality was indeed at a low ebb, and reproaches made her weep.
Tarrant half carried her up to his room, made a light, and fell to his
knees at fire-building.

'Let me do it,' Nancy exclaimed. 'Let me wait upon you--'

'If you don't sit still and keep quiet, you'll make me angry in
earnest.'

'Then you're not _really_ angry with me? I couldn't help it.'

'No, I'm afraid you couldn't,' Tarrant muttered cheerlessly.

'I wanted to tell you that Mary will be our friend. She was speechless
with astonishment; at first I didn't know what she would say; she looked
at me as she had never looked before--as if she were the mistress, and
I the servant. But see what I have come to; all I felt was a dread lest
she should think it her duty to cast me off. I haven't a bit of pride
left. I could have fallen on my knees before her; I almost did. But she
was very good and kind and gentle at last. She'll do everything she can
for me.'

The fire in a blaze, Tarrant stood up and regarded it gloomily.

'Well, did she think it possible?' he asked at length.

'Yes, she did. She said it would be very difficult, but the secret might
be kept--if I were strong enough. And I _am_ strong enough--I _will_
be--'

'It doesn't look like it,' said Tarrant, taking the edge off his words
with a smile.

'I won't come again in this way. Where have you been tonight?'

'Oh, with friends.'

'Which friends? where?'

He moved impatiently.

'People you don't know, Nancy, and wouldn't care about if you did. Do
you know what time it is?'

'Do tell me where you have been. It isn't prying into your affairs. Your
friends ought to be mine; at least, I mean, I ought to know their names,
and something about them. Suppose I were to tell you I had been spending
the evening with friends--'

'My dear girl, I shouldn't ask a question, unless you invited it.
However, it's better to tell you that I have been making arrangements to
sublet these chambers. I can't afford to keep them, even if there were
any use in it. Harvey Munden has introduced me to a man who is likely to
relieve me of the burden. I shall warehouse my books and furniture--'

'Then you are going? Really going to leave England?'

He affected astonishment; in truth, nothing now could surprise him.

'But wasn't it all decided between us? Didn't you repeat it in your
letter?'

'Yes--I know--but I didn't think it would come so soon.'

'We won't talk about it to-night,' said Tarrant firmly. 'For one thing,
there's no time. Come closer to the fire, and get warm through; then I
must see you home.'

Nancy hung her head. When, in a few moments, she looked up again, it was
to say drily:

'There's no need for you to see me home.'

'I'm going to, at all events.'

'Why? You don't care much about me. I might as well be run over--or
anything--'

To this remark no sort of answer was vouchsafed. Nancy sat with her
feet on the fender, and Tarrant kept up a great blaze with chips, which
sputtered out their moisture before they began to crackle. He and she
both seemed intent on this process of combustion.

'Now you're quite warm,' said the young man, as if speaking to a child,
'and it's time to go.'

Nancy rose obediently, gazed at him with dreaming eyes, and suffered
herself to be led away by the arm. In Chancery Lane, Tarrant hailed a
crawling hansom. When they were driving rapidly southward, Nancy began
to question him about the date of his departure; she learnt that he
might be gone in less than a week.

'If you could behave quietly and sensibly, we would have an evening to
make final arrangements.'

'I can,' she answered, with a calm that surprised him. 'If you go
without letting me see you again, I don't know what I might do. But I
can be as sensible as you are, if I'm treated fairly.'

He grasped her hand.

'Remember, dear girl, that I have a good deal to worry me just now. Do
you suppose I leave you with a light heart?'

'If you can persuade me that you care--'

'I care a good deal more than I can easily say. Your position is a very
hard one,--harder than mine. But I'm going away to work for your future.
I see clearly that it's the best thing I could do. Whether Vawdrey's
ideas come to anything or not, I shall make profit out of the journey;
I mean to write,--I think it's all I can do to any purpose,--and the
material I shall get together over there will give me a start. Don't
think I am cold-hearted because I talk in this way; if I broke down, so
much the worse for both of us. The time has come for serious work.'

'But we shan't lose my money. I've made up my mind we shan't.'

'It's impossible for you to guard against every danger. We must be
prepared for the worst, and that responsibility rests on me. Try and
keep your mind at ease; whatever happens, to protect you is my duty, and
I shall not fail in it.'

Speaking thus, Tarrant felt the glow of virtue. His words were
perfectly sincere, but had reference to a future which his thoughts left
comfortably vague.

They were to meet again, probably for the definite parting, three days
hence. Tarrant, whose desire for escape had now become incontrollable,
used the intervening time in a rush of preparations. He did not debate
with himself as to the length of his sojourn in the West Indies; that
must be determined by circumstances. Explicitly he had avoided a promise
on the subject. What money he possessed he would take with him; it might
be to his interest, for Nancy's likewise, to exceed the term of
absence provided for in his stipulations with Mr. Vawdrey. But all he
deliberately thought of was the getting away. Impatient with Nancy,
because of the vagaries resultant from her mental and physical state,
he himself exhibited a flagrant triumph of instinct over reason. Once
in enjoyment of liberty, he would reflect, like a practical man, on the
details of his position, review and recognise his obligations, pay his
debt to honour; but liberty first of all. Not his the nature to accept
bondage; it demoralised him, made him do and say things of which he
was ashamed. Only let him taste the breezes of ocean, and the healthful
spirit which is one with rectitude would again inspire him.

Much to his surprise, he neither saw nor heard from Nancy until the hour
appointed. She came very punctually. On opening the door to her, with an
air of resolute cheerfulness, he saw something in her face that removed
the necessity for playing a part. It was the look which had so charmed
him in their love-days, the indescribable look, characteristic of Nancy,
and of her alone; a gleam between smile and laughter, a glance mingling
pride with submission, a silent note of personality which thrilled the
senses and touched the heart.

'What now?' he asked, holding her hand and gazing at her. 'Some good
news?'

'None that I know of. How hot your room is! Why, you look glad to see
me!'

'Was I ever anything else?'

She answered him with a smile.

'It's a very pleasant surprise,' he continued, watching her as she threw
off her out-door things. 'I expected a doleful visage, eyes red with
weeping.'

'Did you? See how much a man thinks of himself! If you choose to go
away, I choose to think as little of you as possible. That's common
sense--isn't it?'

'I don't want you to cry about it.'

'Oh yes, you do. It flatters you, and you like flattery. But I've been
too obliging. I feel myself again, and there's no more flattery for
you--till you come back. I don't ask you when that will be. I ask you
nothing at all. I am independent of you.'

Tarrant grew uneasy. He feared that this mood of jest would change only
too suddenly, and her collapse into feminine feebleness be the more
complete.

'Be as independent as you like,' he said; 'only keep your love for me.'

'Oh, indeed! It's your experience, is it, that the two things can go
together? That's the difference between man and woman, I suppose. I
shall love you just as little as possible--and how little that will be,
perhaps I had better not tell you.'

Still he stood gazing at her.

'You look very beautiful to-day.'

'I know. I saw it for myself before I left home. But we won't talk about
that. When do you go?'

'My goods will be warehoused to-morrow, and the next day I go to
Liverpool.'

'I'm glad it's so soon. We shan't need to see each other again. Smoke
your pipe. I'm going to make a cup of tea.'

'Kiss me first. You forgot when you came in.'

'You get no kiss by ordering it. Beg for it prettily, and we'll see.'

'What does it all mean, Nancy? How can you have altered like this?'

'You prefer me as I was last time?'

'Not I, indeed. You make me feel that it will be very hard to leave you.
I shall carry away a picture of you quite different from the dreary face
that I had got to be afraid of.'

Nancy laughed, and of a sudden held out her hands to him.

'Haven't I thought of that? These were the very words I hoped to hear
from you. Now beg for a kiss, and you shall have one.'

Never, perhaps, had they spent together so harmonious an evening.
Nancy's tenderness took at length a graver turn, but she remained
herself, face and speech untroubled by morbid influence.

'I won't see you again,' she said, 'because I mightn't be able to behave
as I can to-day. To-day I am myself; for a long time I have been living
I don't know how.'

Tarrant murmured something about her state of health.

'Yes, I know all about that. A strange thought came to me last night.
When my father was alive I fretted because I couldn't be independent; I
wanted to be quite free, to live as I chose; I looked forward to it as
the one thing desirable. Now, I look back on that as a time of liberty.
I am in bondage, now--threefold bondage.'

'How threefold?'

'To you, because I love you, and couldn't cease loving you, however I
tried. Then, to my father's will, which makes me live in hiding, as if I
were a criminal. And then--'

'What other tyranny?'

'You mustn't expect all my love. Before long some one else will rule
over me.--What an exchange I have made! And I was going to be so
independent.'

To the listener, her speech seemed to come from a maturer mind than she
had hitherto revealed. But he suffered from the thought that this might
be merely a pathological phase. In reminding him of her motherhood, she
checked the flow of his emotion.

'You'll remember,' Nancy went on, 'that I'm not enjoying myself whilst
you are away. I don't want you to be unhappy--only to think of me, and
keep in mind what I'm going through. If you do that, you won't be away
from me longer than you can help.'

It was said with unforced pathos, and Tarrant's better part made
generous reply.

'If you find it too hard, dear, write to me, and tell me, and there
shall be an end of it.'

'Never. You think me wretchedly weak, but you shall see--'

'It's of your own free will you undertake it?'

'Yes, of my own free will,' she answered firmly. 'I won't come to you
penniless. It isn't right I should do so. My father didn't mean that. If
I had had the sense and the courage to tell him, all this misery would
have been spared. That money is mine by every right, and I won't lose
it. Not only for your sake and my own--there is some one else to think
of.'

Tarrant gave her a kind look.

'Don't count upon it. Trust to me.'

'I like to hear you say that, but I don't wish you to be put to proof.
You are not the kind of man to make money.'

'How do you mean it?'

'As you like to take it. Silly boy, don't I love you just because you
are _not_ one of the money-making men? If you hadn't a penny in the
world, I should love you just the same; and I couldn't love you more if
you had millions.'

The change which Tarrant expected did not come. To the end, she was
brave and bright, her own best self. She said good-bye without a tear,
refused to let him accompany her, and so, even as she had resolved, left
in her husband's mind an image beckoning his return.




Part IV: The Veiled Figure




CHAPTER 1



Before his admission to a partnership in Mr. Lord's business, Samuel
Barmby lived with his father and two sisters in Coldharbour Lane. Their
house was small, old and crumbling for lack of repair; the landlord, his
ground-lease having but a year or two to run, looked on with equanimity
whilst the building decayed. Under any circumstances, the family must
soon have sought a home elsewhere, and Samuel's good fortune enabled
them to take a house in Dagmar Road, not far from Grove Lane; a new
and most respectable house, with bay windows rising from the half-sunk
basement to the second storey. Samuel, notwithstanding his breadth of
mind, privately admitted the charm of such an address as 'Dagmar Road,'
which looks well at the head of note-paper, and falls with sonority from
the lips.

The Barmby sisters, Lucy and Amelia by name, were unpretentious
young women, without personal attractions, and soberly educated. They
professed a form of Dissent; their reading was in certain religious and
semi-religious periodicals, rarely in books; domestic occupations took
up most of their time, and they seldom had any engagements. At appointed
seasons, a festivity in connection with 'the Chapel' called them forth;
it kept them in a flutter for many days, and gave them a headache. In
the strictest sense their life was provincial; nominally denizens of
London, they dwelt as remote from everything metropolitan as though
Camberwell were a village of the Midlands. If they suffered from
discontent, no one heard of it; a confession by one or the other that
she 'felt dull' excited the sister's surprise, and invariably led to the
suggestion of 'a little medicine.'

Their brother they regarded with admiration, tempered by anxiety. 'Great
talents,' they knew by report, were often perilous to the possessor, and
there was reason to fear that Samuel Bennett Barmby had not resisted
all the temptations to which his intellect exposed him. At the age of
one-and-twenty he made a startling announcement; 'the Chapel' no longer
satisfied the needs of his soul, and he found himself summoned to join
the Church of England as by law established. Religious intolerance not
being a family characteristic, Mr. Barmby and his daughters, though they
looked grave over the young man's apostasy, admitted his freedom in this
matter; their respected friend Mr. Lord belonged to the Church, and it
could not be thought that so earnest-minded a man walked in the way to
perdition. At the same time, Samuel began to exhibit a liking for social
pleasures, which were, it might be hoped, innocent, but, as they kept
him from home of evenings, gave some ground for uneasiness. He had
joined a society of young men who met for intellectual debate, and his
success as an orator fostered the spiritual pride already discernible in
him. His next step could not be regarded without concern, for he became
a member of the National Sunday League. Deceptive name! At first
the Miss. Barmbys supposed this was a union for safe-guarding the
Sabbath-day; it appalled them to discover that the League had quite an
opposite tendency, that its adherents sallied forth together on 'Sunday
excursions,' that they received tickets for Sunday admission to picture
galleries, and in various other ways offended orthodox feeling. But
again the father and sisters gave patient ear to Samuel's elaborate
arguments. They became convinced that he had no evil intentions. The
elder girl, having caught up a pregnant phrase in some periodical she
approved, began to remark that Samuel had 'a modern mind;' and this
eventually consoled them.

When it began to be observed that Samuel talked somewhat frequently of
Miss. Lord, the implied suggestion caused a tremor of confused feeling.
To the Miss. Barmbys, Nancy seemed an enigmatic person; they had
tried to like her, but could not; they objected to her assumption of
superiority, and were in grave doubt as to her opinions on cardinal
points of faith and behaviour. Yet, when it appeared a possibility that
their brother might woo Miss. Lord and win her for a wife, the girls did
their best to see her in a more favourable light. Not for a moment
did it occur to them that Nancy could regard a proposal from Samuel as
anything but an honour; to _them_ she might behave slightingly, for they
were of her own sex, and not clever; but a girl who prided herself on
intellectual attainments must of course look up to Samuel Bennett with
reverence. In their unworldliness--of a truth they were good, simple
creatures--the slight difference of social position seemed unimportant.
And with Samuel's elevation to a partnership, even that one shadowy
obstacle was removed. Henceforth they would meet Nancy in a conciliatory
spirit, and, if she insisted upon it, bow down before her.

Mr. Barmby, senior, whose years drew nigh to three-score, had a great
advantage in point of physical health over his old friend Stephen Lord,
and his mind enjoyed a placidity which promised him length of days.
Since the age of seventeen he had plied a pen in the office of a Life
Assurance Company, where his salary, by small and slow increments, had
grown at length to two hundred and fifty a year. Himself a small and
slow person, he had every reason to be satisfied with this progress, and
hoped for no further advance. He was of eminently sober mind, profoundly
conscientious, and quite devoid of social ambition,--points of character
which explained the long intimacy between him and Stephen Lord. Yet one
habit he possessed which foreshadowed the intellectual composition of
his son,--he loved to write letters to the newspapers. At very long
intervals one of these communications achieved the honour of type, and
then Mr Barmby was radiant with modest self-approval. He never signed
such letters with his own name, but chose a pseudonym befitting the
subject. Thus, if moved to civic indignation by pieces of orange-peel on
the pavement, he styled himself 'Urban Rambler;' if anxious to protest
against the overcrowding of 'bus or railway-carriage, his signature was
'Otium cum Dignitate.' When he took a holiday at the seaside, unwonted
leisure and novel circumstances prompted him to address local editors at
considerable length. The preservation of decency by bathers was then
his favourite topic, and he would sign 'Pudor,' or perchance
'Paterfamilias.' His public epistles, if collected, would have made an
entertaining and instructive volume, so admirably did they represent
one phase of the popular mind. 'No, sir,'--this sentence frequently
occurred,--'it was not thus that our fathers achieved national and civic
greatness.' And again: 'All the feelings of an English parent revolt,'
&c. Or: 'And now, sir, where is this to end?'--a phrase applied at one
moment to the prospects of religion and morality, at another to the
multiplication of muffin-bells.

On a Sunday afternoon, Mr. Barmby often read aloud to his daughters, and
in general his chosen book was 'Paradise Lost.' These performances had
an indescribable solemnity, but it unfortunately happened that, as his
fervour increased, the reader became regardless of aspirates. Thus, at
the culmination of Satanic impiety, he would give forth with shaking
voice--

'_Ail, orrors, ail! and thou profoundest Ell, Receive thy new
possessor!'_

This, though it did not distress the girls, was painful to Samuel
Bennett, who had given no little care to the correction of similar
lapses in his own speech.

Samuel conceived himself much ahead of his family. Quite uneducated, in
any legitimate sense of the word, he had yet learnt that such a thing as
education existed, and, by dint of busy perusal of penny popularities,
had even become familiar with names and phrases, with modes of thought
and of ambition, appertaining to a world for ever closed against him. He
spoke of Culture, and imagined himself far on the way to attain it. His
mind was packed with the oddest jumble of incongruities; Herbert Spencer
jostled with Charles Bradlaugh, Matthew Arnold with Samuel Smiles; in
one breath he lauded George Eliot, in the next was enthusiastic over
a novel by Mrs. Henry Wood; from puerile facetiae he passed to
speculations on the origin of being, and with equally light heart.
Save for Pilgrim's Progress and Robinson Crusoe, he had read no English
classic; since boyhood, indeed, he had probably read no book at all,
for much diet of newspapers rendered him all but incapable of sustained
attention. Whatever he seemed to know of serious authors came to him
at second or third hand. Avowing his faith in Christianity when with
orthodox people, in the society of sceptics he permitted himself to
smile at the old faiths,--though he preferred to escape this temptation,
the Nonconformist conscience still reigning within him. At home he posed
as a broad-minded Anglican, and having somewhere read that Tennyson's
'In Memoriam' represented this attitude, he spoke of the poem as 'one of
the books that have made me what I am.'

His circle of acquaintances lay apart from that in which the Lords
moved; it consisted for the most part of young men humbly endowed in
the matter of income, and making little pretence of social dignity. When
others resorted to theatre or public-house, or places not so readily
designated, Samuel and his friends met together to discourse on subjects
of which they knew somewhat less than nothing. Some of them occasionally
held audacious language, especially when topics such as the relations of
the sexes invited their wisdom; they had read something somewhere
which urged them to cast off the trammels of conventional thought;
they 'ventured to say' that in a very few years 'surprising changes of
opinion would come about.' These revolutionaries, after startling the
more sober of their hearers, went quietly home to mother or landlady,
supped on cheese and cocoa, and next day plied the cleric pen with
exemplary zeal.

Samuel believed himself in love. That he should conceive matrimonial
intentions with regard to Stephen Lord's daughter was but the natural
issue of circumstance; from that conception resulted an amorous mood, so
much inflamed by Nancy's presence that a young man, whose thoughts did
not often transgress decorum, had every reason to suppose himself her
victim. When Nancy rejected his formal offer of devotion, the desire to
wed her besieged him more vigorously; Samuel was piqued at the tone of
