her. And I don't think she ought to be living alone, like she is, with
no one to advise and help her.'

'I have felt that very strongly,' said Mrs. Damerel. 'The old servant
who is with her can't be at all a suitable companion--that is, to be
treated on equal terms. A very strange arrangement, indeed. But you
don't mean that you thought less well of her because she is living in
that way?'

'Of course not. It's something a good deal more serious than that.'

Mrs. Damerel became suddenly grave.

'Then I certainly ought to know.'

'You ought. I think it very likely she would have been glad enough to
make a friend of you, if it hadn't been for this--this affair, which
stood in the way. There can't be any harm in telling you, as you
couldn't wish anything but her good.'

'That surely you may take for granted.'

'Well then, I have an idea that she's trying to earn money because
some one is getting all he can out of her--leaving her very little for
herself; and if so, it's time you interfered.'

The listener was so startled that she changed colour.

'You mean that some man has her in his power?'

'If I'm not mistaken, it comes to that. But for her father's will, she
would have been married long ago, and--she ought to be.'

Having blurted out these words, Crewe felt much more at ease. As Mrs.
Damerel's eyes fell, the sense of sexual predominance awoke in him, and
he was no longer so prostrate before the lady's natural and artificial
graces.

'How do you know this?' she asked, in an undertone.

'From some one who had it from Miss. Lord herself.'

'Are you quite sure that it isn't a malicious falsehood?'

'As sure as I am that I sit here. I know the man's name, and where he
lives, and all about him. And I know where the child is at nurse.

'The child?--Oh--surely--never!'

A genuine agitation possessed her; she had a frightened, pain-stricken
look, and moved as if she must act without delay.

'It's nearly six months old,' Crewe continued. 'Of course that's why she
was away so long.'

'But why haven't you told me this before? It was your duty to tell
me--your plain duty. How long have you known?'

'I heard of it first of all about three months ago, but it was only the
other day that I was told the man's name, and other things about him.'

'Is it known to many people? Is the poor girl talked about?'

'No, no,' Crewe replied, with confidence. 'The person who told me is the
only one who has found it out; you may depend upon that.'

'It must be a woman,' said Mrs. Damerel sharply.

'Yes, it's a woman. Some one _I_ know very well. She told me just
because she thought I was still hoping to marry Miss. Lord, and--well,
the truth is, though we're good friends, she has a little spite against
me, and I suppose it amused her to tell me something disagreeable.'

'I have no doubt,' said Mrs. Damerel, 'that the secret has been betrayed
to a dozen people.'

'I'll go bail it hasn't!' returned Crewe, falling into his vernacular.

'I can hardly believe it at all. I should never have dreamt that such a
thing was possible. What is the man's name? what is his position?'

'Tarrant is his name, and he's related somehow to a Mr. Vawdrey, well
known in the City, who has a big house over at Champion Hill. I have no
notion how they came together, or how long it was going on. But this Mr.
Tarrant has been in America for a year, I understand; has only just come
back; and now he's living In poorish lodgings,--Great College Street,
Westminster. I've made a few inquiries about him, but I can't get at
very much. A man who knows Vawdrey tells me that Tarrant has no means,
and that he's a loafing, affected sort of chap. If that's true,--and
it seems likely from the way he's living,--of course he will be ready
enough to marry Miss. Lord when the proper time has come; I'm only
afraid that's all he had in view from the first. And I can't help
suspecting, as I said, that she's supporting him now. If not, why should
she go and work in a shop? At all events, a decent man wouldn't allow
her to do it.'

'A decent man,' said the listener, 'would never have allowed her to fall
into disgrace.'

'Certainly not,' Crewe assented with energy. 'And as for my keeping
quiet about it, Mrs. Damerel, you've only to think what an awkward
affair it was to mention. I'm quite sure you'll have a little feeling
against me, because I knew of it--'

'I beg you not to think that!' She returned to her manner of suave
friendliness. 'I shall owe you gratitude for telling me, and nothing but
gratitude. You have behaved with very great delicacy; I cannot say how
highly I appreciate your feeling on the poor girl's behalf.'

'If I can be of any use, I am always at your service.'

'Thank you, dear Mr. Crewe, thank you! In you I have found a real
friend,--and how rarely they are met with! Of course I shall make
inquiries at once. My niece must be protected. A helpless girl in that
dreadful position may commit unheard-of follies. I fear you are right.
He is making her his victim. With such a secret, she is absolutely at
his mercy. And it explains why she has shunned me. Oh, do you think her
brother knows it?'

'I'm quite sure he doesn't; hasn't the least suspicion.'

'Of course not. But it's wonderful how she has escaped. Your
informant--how did she find it out? You say she had the story from the
girl's own lips. But why? She must have shown that she knew something.'

Crewe imparted such details as had come to his knowledge; they were
meagre, and left many obscurities, but Mrs. Damerel rewarded him with
effusive gratitude, and strengthened the spell which she had cast upon
this knight of Farringdon Street.



CHAPTER 7



Every day Tarrant said to himself: 'I am a free man; I was only married
in a dream.' Every night he thought of Nancy, and suffered heartache.

He thought, too, of Nancy's child, his own son. That Nancy was a tender
mother, he knew from the letter she had written him after the baby's
birth,--a letter he would have liked to read again, but forbore. Must
not the separation from her child be hard? If he saw the poor little
mortal, how would the sight affect him? At moments he felt a longing
perhaps definable as the instinct of paternity; but he was not the man
to grow sentimental over babies, his own or other people's. Irony and
sarcasm--very agreeable to a certain class of newspaper readers--were
just now his stock-in-trade, and he could not afford to indulge any
softer mode of meditation.

His acquaintances agreed that the year of absence had not improved him.
He was alarmingly clever; he talked well; but his amiability, the poetry
of his mind, seemed to have been lost in America. He could no longer
admire or praise.

For his own part, he did not clearly perceive this change. It struck
him only that the old friends were less interesting than he had thought
them; and he looked for reception in circles better able to appreciate
his epigrams and paradoxes.

A few weeks of such life broke him so completely to harness, that he
forgot the seasonable miseries which had been wont to drive him from
London at the approach of November. When the first fog blackened against
his windows, he merely lit the lamp and wrote on, indifferent. Two years
ago he had declared that a London November would fatally blight his
soul; that he must flee to a land of sunshine, or perish. There was
little time, now, to think about his soul.

One Monday morning arrived a letter which surprised and disturbed him.
It ran thus:

'Mrs. Eustace Damerel presents her compliments to Mr. Tarrant, and would
take it as a great favour if he could call upon her, either to-morrow or
Tuesday, at any hour between three and seven. She particularly desires
to see Mr. Tarrant on a private matter of mutual interest.'

Now this could have but one meaning. Mrs. Eustace Damerel was, of
course, Nancy's relative; from Nancy herself, or in some other way, she
must have learnt the fact of his marriage. Probably from Nancy, since
she knew where he lived. He was summoned to a judicial interview.
Happily, attendance was not compulsory.

Second thoughts advised him that he had better accept the invitation.
He must know what measures were in progress against him. If Nancy had
already broken her word, she might be disposed to revenge herself in
every way that would occur to an angry woman of small refinement; she
might make life in London impossible for him.

He sat down and penned a reply, saying that he would call upon Mrs.
Damerel at five to-morrow. But he did not post this. After all, a day's
delay would only irritate him; better to go this afternoon, in which
case it was not worth while sending an answer.

It seemed to him very probable that Nancy would be with her aunt, to
confront him. If so,--if indeed she were going to act like any coarse
woman, with no regard but for her own passions and Interests,--he would
at least have the consolation of expelling from his mind, at once and
for ever, her haunting image.

Mrs. Damerel, who during the past twelve months had changed her abode
half-a-dozen times, now occupied private lodgings in Tyburnia. On his
admittance, Tarrant sat alone for nearly five minutes in a pretentiously
furnished room--just the room in which he had expected to find Nancy's
relative; the delay and the surroundings exasperated his nervous mood,
so that, when the lady entered, he behaved with slighter courtesy than
became his breeding. Nothing in her appearance surprised or interested
him. There was a distant facial resemblance to Nancy, natural in her
mother's sister; there was expensive, though not particularly tasteful
dress, and a gait, a manner, distinguishable readily enough from what
they aimed at displaying--the grace of a woman born to social privilege.

It would be a humiliating conversation; Tarrant braced himself to go
through with it. He stood stiffly while his hostess regarded him with
shrewd eyes. She had merely bent her head.

'Will you sit down, Mr. Tarrant?'

He took a chair without speaking.

'I think you know me by name?'

'I have heard of a Mrs. Damerel.'

'Some time ago, I suppose? And in that you have the advantage of me. I
heard your name yesterday for the first time.'

It was the sharp rejoinder of a woman of the world. Tarrant began to
perceive that he had to do with intelligence, and would not be allowed
to perform his share of the talking _de haut en bas._

'In what can I be of service to you?' he asked with constrained
civility.

'You can tell me, please, what sort of connection there is between you
and my niece, Miss. Lord.'

Mrs. Damerel was obviously annoyed by his demeanour, and made little
effort to disguise her feeling. She gave him the look of one who does
not mean to be trifled with.

'Really,' answered the young man with a smile, 'I don't know what
authority you have to make such inquiries. You are not, I believe, Miss.
Lord's guardian.'

'No, but I am her only relative who can act on her behalf where
knowledge of the world is required. As a gentleman, you will bear this
in mind. It's quite true that I can't oblige you to tell me anything;
but when I say that I haven't spoken even to my niece of what I have
heard, and haven't communicated with the gentlemen who _are_ her
guardians, I think you will see that I am not acting in a way you ought
to resent.'

'You mean, Mrs. Damerel, that what passes between us is in confidence?'

'I only mean, Mr. Tarrant, that I am giving you an opportunity of
explaining yourself--so that I can keep the matter private if your
explanation is satisfactory.'

'You have a charge of some kind to bring against me,' said Tarrant
composedly. 'I must first of all hear what it is. The prisoner at the
bar can't be prosecuting counsel at the same time.'

'Do you acknowledge that you are on intimate terms with Miss. Lord?'

'I have known her for a year or two.'

Tarrant began to exercise caution. Nancy had no hand in this matter;
some one had told tales about her, that was all. He must learn, without
committing himself, exactly how much had been discovered.

'Are you engaged to her?'

'Engaged to marry her? No.'

He saw in Mrs. Damerel's clear eye that she convicted him of
ambiguities.

'You have not even made her a promise of marriage?'

'How much simpler, if you would advance a clear charge. I will answer it
honestly.'

Mrs. Damerel seemed to weigh the value of this undertaking. Tarrant met
her gaze with steady indifference.

'It may only be a piece of scandal,--a mistake, or a malicious
invention. I have been told that--that you are in everything but law my
niece's husband.'

They regarded each other during a moment's silence. Tarrant's look
indicated rapid and anxious thought.

'It seems,' he said at length, 'that you have no great faith in the
person who told you this.'

'It is the easiest matter in the world to find out whether the story
is true or not. Inquiries at Falmouth would be quite sufficient, I dare
say. I give you the opportunity of keeping it quiet, that's all.'

'You won't care to let me know who told you?'

'There's no reason why I shouldn't,' said Mrs. Damerel, after
reflection. 'Do you know Mr. Luckworth Crewe?'

'I don't think I ever heard the name.'

'Indeed? He is well acquainted with Miss. Lord. Some one he wouldn't
mention gave him all the particulars, having learnt them from Miss Lord
herself, and he thought it his duty to inform me of my niece's very
painful position.'

'Who is this man?' Tarrant asked abruptly.

'I am rather surprised you have never heard of him. He's a man of
business. My nephew, Mr. Horace Lord, is shortly to be in partnership
with him.'

'Crewe? No, the name is quite strange to me.'

Tarrant's countenance darkened; he paused for an instant, then added
impatiently:

'You say he had "all the particulars." What were they, these
particulars?'

'Will one be enough? A child was born at Falmouth, and is now at a place
just outside London, in the care of some stranger.'

The source of this information might, or might not, be Nancy herself. In
either case, there was no further hope of secrecy. Tarrant abandoned his
reserve, and spoke quietly, civilly.

'So far, you have heard the truth. What have you to ask of me, now?'

'You have been abroad for a long time, I think?'

'For about a year.'

'Does that mean that you wished to see no more of her?'

'That I deserted her, in plain words? It meant nothing of the kind.'

'You are aware, then, that she has taken a place in a house of business,
just as if she thought it necessary to earn her own living?'

Tarrant displayed astonishment.

'I am aware of no such thing. How long has that been going on?'

'Then you don't see her?'

'I have seen her, but she told me nothing of that.'

'There's something very strange in this, Mr. Tarrant. You seem to me to
be speaking the truth. No, please don't take offence. Before I saw you,
you were a total stranger to me, and after what I had heard, I couldn't
think very well of you. I may as well confess that you seem a different
kind of man from what I expected. I don't wish to offend you, far from
it. If we can talk over this distressing affair in a friendly way,
so much the better. I have nothing whatever in view but to protect my
niece--to do the best that can be done for her.'

'That I have taken for granted,' Tarrant replied. 'I understand that you
expected to meet a scoundrel of a very recognisable type. Well, I am
not exactly that. But what particular act of rascality have you in mind?
Something worse than mere seduction, of course.'

'Will you answer a disagreeable question? Are you well-to-do?'

'Anything but that.'

'Indeed? And you can form no idea why Nancy has gone to work in a shop?'

Tarrant raised his eyebrows.

'I see,' he said deliberately. 'You suspect that I have been taking
money from her?'

'I _did_ suspect it; now it seems to me more unlikely.'

'Many thanks,' he answered, with cold irony. 'So the situation was this:
Miss. Lord had been led astray by a rascally fellow, who not only left
her to get on as best she could, but lived on her income, so that she
had at length to earn money for her own needs. There's something very
clear and rounded, very dramatic, about that. What I should like to know
is, whether Miss. Lord tells the story in this way.'

'I can't say that she does. I think it was Mr. Crewe who explained
things like that.'

'I am obliged to Mr. Crewe. But he may, after all, only repeat what he
has heard. It's a pity we don't know Miss. Lord's actual confidante.'

'Of course you have _not_ received assistance from her?'

Tarrant stared for a moment, then laughed unpleasantly.

'I have no recollection of it.'

'Another disagreeable question. Did you really go away and leave her to
get on as best she could?'

He looked darkly at her.

'And if I did?'

'Wasn't it rather unaccountable behaviour--in a gentleman?'

'Possibly.'

'I can't believe it. There is something unexplained.'

'Yes, there _is_ something unexplained.--Mrs. Damerel, I should have
thought you would naturally speak first to your niece. Why did you send
for me before doing so?'

'To find out what sort of man you were, so that I should be able to form
my own opinion of what Nancy chose to tell me. Perhaps she may refuse to
tell me anything at all--we are not like ordinary relatives, I am sorry
to say. But I dare say you know better than I do how she thinks of me.'

'I have heard her speak of you only once or twice. At all events, now
that you are prepared, you will go and see her?'

'I must. It would be wrong to stand by and do nothing.'

'And you will see her guardians?'

'That must depend. I certainly shall if she seems to be suffering
hardships. I must know why she goes out to work, as if she were pinched
for money. There is her child to support, of course, but that wouldn't
make any difference to her; she is well provided for.'

'Yes. There's no choice but to fall back upon the villain theory.'

He rose, and took up his hat.

'You mustn't go yet, Mr. Tarrant,' said his hostess firmly. 'I have said
that I can't believe such things of you. If you would only explain--'

'That's just what I can't do. It's as much a mystery to me as to
you--her wishing to earn money.'

'I was going to say--if you would only explain your intentions as to the
future--'

'My intentions will depend entirely on what I hear from your niece. I
shall see her as soon as possible. Perhaps you can tell me at what hour
she returns from business?'

'No, I can't. I wish you would talk a little longer.'

His eyes flashed angrily.

'Mrs. Damerel, I have said all that I am willing to say. What you have
heard is partly true; you probably won't have to wait very long for the
rest of the story, but I have no time and no inclination to tell it.
Go and see your niece to-morrow by all means,--or her guardians, if it
seems necessary.

'I am very sorry we are parting in this way.'

'You must remember how difficult it is to keep one's temper under
certain kinds of accusation.'

'I don't accuse you.'

'Well, then, to explain calmly that one couldn't commit this or that
sordid rascality;--it comes to the same thing. However, I am obliged to
you for opening my eyes. I have got into a very foolish position, and I
promise you I will get out of it as quickly as may be.'

Whereupon he bowed his leave-taking, and withdrew.



CHAPTER 8



It was not yet dark, but street-lamps had begun to flare and flicker in
the gust of a cold, damp evening. A thin and slippery mud smeared the
pavement. Tarrant had walked mechanically as far as to the top of Park
Lane before he began to consider his immediate course. Among the people
who stood waiting for omnibuses, he meditated thus:

'She may not get home until seven or half-past; then she will have a
meal. I had better put it off till about half-past eight. That leaves me
some four hours to dispose of. First of all I'll walk home, and--yes, by
all the devils! I'll finish that bit of writing. A year ago I could
no more have done it, under such circumstances, than have built a
suspension bridge. To-day I will--just to show that I've some grit in
me.'

Down Park Lane, and by Buckingham Palace across to Westminster, he kept
his thoughts for the most part on that bit of writing. Only thus could
he save himself from an access of fury which would only have injured
him--the ire of shame in which a man is tempted to beat his head against
stone walls. He composed aloud, balancing many a pretty antithesis, and
polishing more than one lively paradox.

In his bedroom-study the fire had gone out. No matter; he would write in
the cold. It was mere amanuensis work, penning at the dictation of his
sarcastic demon. Was he a sybarite? Many a poor scribbler has earned bed
and breakfast with numb fingers. The fire in his body would serve him
for an hour or two.

So he sat down, and achieved his task to the last syllable. He read it
through, corrected it, made it up for post, and rose with the plaudits
of conscience. 'Who shall say now that I am a fop and a weakling?'

Half-past seven. Good; just time enough to appease his hunger and reach
Grove Lane by the suitable hour. He went out to the little coffee-shop
which was his resort in Spartan moods, ate with considerable appetite,
and walked over Westminster Bridge to the Camberwell tram. To kill time
on the journey he bought a halfpenny paper.

As he ascended Grove Lane his heart throbbed more than the exercise
warranted. At the door of the house, which he had never yet entered,
and which he had not looked upon for more than a year, he stood to calm
himself, with lips set and cheek pale in the darkness. Then a confident
peal at the knocker.

It was Mary who opened. He had never seen her, but knew that this grave,
hard-featured person, not totally unlike a born gentlewoman, must be
Mary Woodruff. And in her eyes he read a suspicion of his own identity.

'Is Miss. Lord at home?' he asked, in a matter-of-fact way.

'Yes.--What name shall I mention?'

'Mr. Tarrant.'

Her eyes fell, and she requested him to enter, to wait in the hall for
a moment; then went upstairs. She was absent for a few minutes, and on
returning asked him to follow her. She led to the drawing-room: on the
way, Tarrant felt a surprise that in so small a house the drawing-room
should be correctly situated on the upper floor.

Here he had again to wait. A comfortable room, he thought, and with a
true air of home about it. He knew how significant is this impression
first received on entering a strange abode; home or encampment,
attraction or repulsion, according to the mind of the woman who rules
there. Was it Nancy, or Mary, who made the atmosphere of the house?

The door opened, and he faced towards it.

Nancy's dress had an emphasis of fashion formerly unknown to it;
appropriate enough considering her new occupation. The flush upon her
cheeks, the light of doubtful meaning in her eyes, gave splendour to
a beauty matured by motherhood. In the dark street, a fortnight ago,
Tarrant could hardly be said to have seen her; he gazed in wonder and
admiration.

'What has brought you here?'

'A cause quite sufficient.--This is a little house; can we talk without
being overheard?'

'You can shout if you wish to,' she answered flippantly. 'The servant is
Out, and Mary is downstairs.'

Nancy did not seat herself, and offered no seat to the visitor.

'Why have you made yourself a shop-girl?'

'I didn't know that I had.'

'I am told you go daily to some shop or other.'

'I am engaged at a place of business, but I don't.--However, that
doesn't matter. What business is it of yours?'

'Who is Mr. Luckworth Crewe?'

Nancy kept her eyes still more resolutely fronting his severe look.

'A man I used to know.'

'You don't see him now-a-days?'

'It's many months since I saw him.'

'Who, then, is the woman who has told him your whole story--with
embellishments, and who says she has had it from you yourself?'

Nancy was speechless.

'I don't say there is any such person,' Tarrant continued. 'The man may
have lied in that particular. But he has somehow got to know a good deal
about you,--where and when your child was born, where it is now, where
I live, and so on. And all this he has reported to your aunt, Mrs.
Damerel.'

'To her?--How do you know?'

For answer he held out Mrs. Damerel's note of invitation, then added:

'I have been with her this afternoon. She is coming to offer you her
protection against the scoundrel who has ruined you, and who is now
living upon you.'

'What do you mean?'

'That's the form the story has taken, either in Mr. Crewe's mind, or in
that of the woman who told it to him.'

'Don't they know that I am married?'

'Evidently not.'

'And they think you--are having money from me?'

'That's how they explain your taking a place in a shop.'

Nancy laughed, and laughed again.

'How ridiculous!'

'I'm glad you can get amusement out of it. Perhaps you can suggest how
the joke began?'

She moved a few steps, then turned again to him.

'Yes, I know who the woman must be. It's Beatrice French.'

'A bosom friend of yours, of course.'

'Nothing of the kind.'

'But you have taken her into your confidence--up to a certain point?'

'Yes, I have told her. And she told Mr. Crewe? I understand that. Well,
what does it matter?'

Tarrant was at a loss to interpret this singular levity. He had never
truly believed that reading of Nancy's character by means of which he
tried to persuade himself that his marriage was an unmitigated calamity,
and a final parting between them the best thing that could happen.
His memories of her, and the letters she had written him, coloured her
personality far otherwise. Yet was not the harsh judgment after all the
true one?

'It doesn't matter to you,' he said, 'that people think you an unmarried
mother,--that people are talking about you with grins and sneers?'

Nancy reddened in angry shame.

'Let them talk!' she exclaimed violently. 'What does it matter, so long
as they don't know I'm married?'

'So long as they don't know?--How came you to tell this woman?'

'Do you suppose I told her for amusement? She found out what had
happened at Falmouth,--found out simply by going down there and making
inquiries; because she suspected me of some secret affair with a man she
wants to marry herself--this Mr. Crewe. The wonder of wonders is that
no one else got to know of it in that way. Any one who cared much what
happened to me would have seen the all but impossibility of keeping such
a secret.'

It is a notable instance of evolutionary process that the female mind,
in wrath, flies to just those logical ineptitudes which most surely
exasperate the male intelligence. Tarrant gave a laugh of irate scorn.

'Why, you told me the other day that I cared particularly whether your
secret was discovered or not--that I only married you in the hope of
profiting by it?'

'Wouldn't any woman think so?'

'I hope not. I believe there are some women who don't rush naturally to
a base supposition.'

'Did I?' Nancy exclaimed, with a vehement passion that made her breast
heave. 'Didn't I give you time enough--believe in you until I could
believe no longer?'

The note of her thrilling voice went to Tarrant's heart, and his head
drooped.

'That may be true,' he said gravely. 'But go on with your explanation.
This woman came to you, and told you what she had discovered?'

'Yes.'

'And you allowed her to think you unmarried?'

'What choice had I? How was my child to be brought up if I lost
everything?'

'Good God, Nancy! Did you imagine I should leave you to starve?'

His emotion, his utterance of her name, caused her to examine him with a
kind of wonder.

'How did I know?--How could I tell, at that time, whether you were alive
or dead?--I had to think of myself and the child.'

'My poor girl!'

The words fell from him involuntarily. Nancy's look became as scornful
and defiant as before.

'Oh, that was nothing. I've gone through a good deal more than that.'

'Stop. Tell me this. Have you in your anger--anger natural
enough--allowed yourself to speak to any one about me in the way I
should never forgive? In the spirit of your letter, I mean. Did you give
this Beatrice French any ground for thinking that I made a speculation
of you?'

'I said nothing of that kind.'

'Nor to any one else?'

'To no one.'

'Yet you told this woman where I was living, and that I had been abroad
for a long time. Why?'

'Yes, I told her so much about you,' Nancy replied. 'Not when she first
came to me, but afterwards--only the other day. I wanted employment, and
didn't know how to get it, except through her. She promised me a place
if I would disclose your name; not that she knew or cared anything
about _you_, but because she still had suspicions about Mr. Crewe. I was
desperate, and I told her.'

'Desperate? Why?'

'How can I make you understand what I have gone through? What do you
care? And what do _I_ care whether you understand or not? It wasn't for
money, and Beatrice French knew it wasn't.'

'Then it must have been that you could not bear the monotony of your
life.'

Her answer was a short, careless laugh.

'Where is this shop? What do you do?'

'It's a dress-supply association. I advise fools about the fashions,
and exhibit myself as a walking fashion-plate. I can't see how it should
interest you.'

'Whatever concerns you, Nancy, interests me more than anything else in
the world.'

Again she laughed.

'What more do you want to know?'

She was half turned from him, leaning at the mantelpiece, a foot on the
fender.

'You said just now that you have gone through worse things than the
shame of being thought unmarried. Tell me about it all.'

'Not I, indeed. When I was willing to tell you everything, you didn't
care to hear it. It's too late now.'

'It's not too late, happily, to drag you out of this wretched slough
into which you are sinking. Whatever the cost, _that_ shall be done!'

'Thank you, I am not disposed to let any one drag me anywhere. I want
no help; and if I did, you would be the last person I should accept it
from. I don't know why you came here after the agreement we made the
other night.'

Tarrant stepped towards her.

'I came to find out whether you were telling lies about me, and I should
never have thought it possible but for my bad conscience. I know you had
every excuse for being embittered and for acting revengefully. It seems
you have only told lies about yourself. As, after all, you are my wife,
I shan't allow that.'

Once more she turned upon him passionately.

'I am _not_ your wife! You married me against your will, and shook me
off as soon as possible. I won't be bound to you; I shall act as a free
woman.'

'Bound to me you are, and shall be--as I to you.'

'You may say it fifty times, and it will mean nothing.--How bound to
you? Bound to share my money?'

'I forgive you that, because I have treated you ill. You don't mean it
either. You know I am incapable of such a thought. But that shall very
soon be put right. Your marriage shall be made known at once.'

'Known to whom?'

'To the people concerned--to your guardians.'

'Don't trouble yourself,' she answered, with a smile. 'They know it
already.'

Tarrant half closed his eyes as he looked at her.

'What's the use of such a silly falsehood?'

'I told you I had gone through a good deal more than you imagined. I
have struggled to keep my money, in spite of shames and miseries, and I
will have it for myself--and my child! If you want to know the truth,
go to Samuel Barmby, and ask him what he has had to do with me. I owe no
explanation to _you_.'

Tarrant could see her face only in profile. Marvelling at the
complications she gradually revealed, he felt his blood grow warm with
desire of her beauty. She was his wife, yet guarded as by maidenhood.
A familiar touch would bring the colour to her cheeks, the light of
resentment to her eyes. Passion made him glad of the estrangement which
compelled a new wooing, and promised, on her part, a new surrender.

'You don't owe it me, Nancy; but if I beg you to tell me all--because
I have come to my senses again--because I know how foolish and cruel I
have been--'

'Remember what we agreed. Go your way, and let me go mine.'

'I had no idea of what I was agreeing to. I took it for granted that
your marriage was strictly a secret, and that you might be free in the
real sense if you chose.'

'Yes, and you were quite willing, because it gave you your freedom as
well. I am as free as I wish to be. I have made a life for myself
that satisfies me--and now you come to undo everything. I won't be
tormented--I have endured enough.'

'Then only one course is open to me. I shall publish your marriage
everywhere. I shall make a home for you, and have the child brought to
it; then come or not, as you please.'

At mention of the child Nancy regarded him with cold curiosity.

'How are you to make a home for me? I thought you had difficulty enough
in supporting yourself.'

'That is no concern of yours. It shall be done, and in a day or two.
Then make your choice.'

'You think I can be forced to live with a man I don't love?'

'I shouldn't dream of living with a woman who didn't love me. But you
are married, and a mother, and the secrecy that is degrading you shall
come to an end. Acknowledge me or not, I shall acknowledge _you_, and
make it known that I am to blame for all that has happened.'

'And what good will you do?'

'I shall do good to myself, at all events. I'm a selfish fellow, and
shall be so to the end, no doubt.'

Nancy glanced at him to interpret the speech by his expression. He was
smiling.

'What good will it do you to have to support me? The selfishness I see
in it is your wishing to take me from a comfortable home and make me
poor.'

'That can't be helped. And, what's more, you won't think it a hardship.'

'How do you know that? I have borne dreadful degradations rather than
lose my money.'

'That was for the child's sake, not for your own.'

He said it softly and kindly, and for the first time Nancy met his eyes
without defiance.

'It was; I could always have earned my own living, somehow.'

Tarrant paused a moment, then spoke with look averted.

'Is he well, and properly cared for?'

'If he were not well and safe, I shouldn't be away from him.'

'When will you let me see him, Nancy?'

She did not smile, but there was a brightening of her countenance, which
she concealed. Tarrant stepped to her side.

'Dear--my own love--will you try to forgive me? It was all my cursed
laziness. It would never have happened if I hadn't fallen into poverty.
Poverty is the devil, and it overcame me.'

'How can you think that _I_ shall be strong enough to face it?' she
asked, moving half a step away. 'Leave me to myself; I am contented; I
have made up my mind about what is before me, and I won't go through all
that again.'

Tired of standing, she dropped upon the nearest chair, and lay back.

'You can't be contented, Nancy, in a position that dishonours you. From
what you tell me, it seems that your secret is no secret at all. Will
you compel me to go to that man Barmby and seek information from him
about my own wife?'

'I have had to do worse things than that.'

'Don't torture me by such vague hints. I entreat you to tell me at once
the worst that you have suffered. How did Barmby get to know of your
marriage? And why has he kept silent about it? There can't be anything
that you are ashamed to say.'

'No. The shame is all yours.'

'I take it upon myself, all of it; I ought never to have left you; but
that baseness followed only too naturally on the cowardice which kept
me from declaring our marriage when honour demanded it. I have played a
contemptible part in this story; don't refuse to help me now that I am
ready to behave more like a man. Put your hand in mine, and let us be
friends, if we mayn't be more.'

She sat irresponsive.

'You were a brave girl. You consented to my going away because it seemed
best, and I took advantage of your sincerity. Often enough that last
look of yours has reproached me. I wonder how I had the heart to leave
you alone.'

Nancy raised herself, and said coldly:

'It was what I might have expected. I had only my own folly to thank.
You behaved as most men would.'

This was a harder reproach than any yet. Tarrant winced under it. He
would much rather have been accused of abnormal villainy.

'And I was foolish,' continued Nancy, 'in more ways than you knew. You
feared I had told Jessica Morgan of our marriage, and you were right; of
course I denied it. She has been the cause of my worst trouble.'

In rapid sentences she told the story of her successive humiliations,
recounted her sufferings at the hands of Jessica and Beatrice and Samuel
Barmby. When she ceased, there were tears in her eyes.

'Has Barmby been here again?' Tarrant asked sternly.

'Yes. He has been twice, and talked in just the same way, and I had to
sit still before him--'

'Has he said one word that--?'

'No, no,' she interrupted hastily. 'He's only a fool--not man enough
to--'

'That saves me trouble,' said Tarrant; 'I have only to treat him like
a fool. My poor darling, what vile torments you have endured! And
you pretend that you would rather live on this fellow's interested
generosity--for, of course, he hopes to be rewarded--than throw the
whole squalid entanglement behind you and be a free, honest woman, even
if a poor one?'

'I see no freedom.'

'You have lost all your love for me. Well, I can't complain of that. But
bear my name you shall, and be supported by me. I tell you that it was
never _possible_ for me actually to desert you and the little one--never
possible. I shirked a duty as long as I could; that's all it comes to.
I loafed and paltered until the want of a dinner drove me into honesty.
Try to forget it, dear Nancy. Try to forgive me, my dearest!'

She was dry-eyed again, and his appeal seemed to have no power over her
emotions.

'You are forgetting,' she said practically, 'that I have lived on money
to which I had no right, and that I--or you--can be forced to repay it.'

'Repaid it must be, whether demanded or not. Where does Barmby live?
Perhaps I could see him to-night.'

'What means have you of keeping us all alive?'

'Some of my work has been accepted here and there; but there's something
else I have in mind. I don't ask you to become a poverty-stricken wife
in the ordinary way. I can't afford to take a house. I must put you,
with the child, into as good lodgings as I can hope to pay for, and work
on by myself, just seeing you as often as you will let me. Even if you
were willing, it would be a mistake for us to live together. For one
thing, I couldn't work under such conditions; for another, it would
make you a slave. Tell me: are you willing to undertake the care of the
child, if nothing else is asked of you?'

Nancy gave him a disdainful smile, a smile like those of her girlhood.

'I'm not quite so feeble a creature as you think me.'

'You would rather have the child to yourself, than be living away from
him?'

'If you have made up your mind, why trouble to ask such questions?'

'Because I have no wish to force burdens upon you. You said just now
that you could see little prospect of freedom in such a life as I have
to offer you. I thought you perhaps meant that the care of the child
would--'
