'I know, I know. Just let me hear what you will give.'

'Well, if you want a valuation, I say eighteen pound ten.'

It was more than Reardon had expected, though much less than a man who
understood such affairs would have obtained.

'That's the most you can give?'

'Wouldn't pay me to give a sixpence more. You see--'

He began to point out defects, but Reardon cut him short.

'Can you take them away at once?'

'At wunst? Would two o'clock do?'

'Yes, it would.'

'And might you want these other things takin' anywheres?'

'Yes, but not till to-morrow. They have to go to Islington. What would
you do it for?'

This bargain also was completed, and the dealer went his way. Thereupon
Reardon set to work to dispose of his books; by half-past one he had
sold them for a couple of guineas. At two came the cart that was to take
away the furniture, and at four o'clock nothing remained in the flat
save what had to be removed on the morrow.

The next thing to be done was to go to Islington, forfeit a week's rent
for the two rooms he had taken, and find a single room at the lowest
possible cost. On the way, he entered an eating-house and satisfied his
hunger, for he had had nothing since breakfast. It took him a couple of
hours to discover the ideal garret; it was found at length in a narrow
little by-way running out of Upper Street. The rent was half-a-crown a
week.

At seven o'clock he sat down in what once was called his study, and
wrote the following letter:

'Enclosed in this envelope you will find twenty pounds. I have been
reminded that your relatives will be at the expense of your support;
it seemed best to me to sell the furniture, and now I send you all
the money I can spare at present. You will receive to-morrow a box
containing several things I did not feel justified in selling. As soon
as I begin to have my payment from Carter, half of it shall be sent
to you every week. My address is: 5 Manville Street, Upper Street,
Islington.--EDWIN REARDON.'

He enclosed the money, in notes and gold, and addressed the envelope to
his wife. She must receive it this very night, and he knew not how to
ensure that save by delivering it himself. So he went to Westbourne Park
by train, and walked to Mrs Yule's house.

At this hour the family were probably at dinner; yes, the window of the
dining-room showed lights within, whilst those of the drawing-room were
in shadow. After a little hesitation he rang the servants' bell. When
the door opened, he handed his letter to the girl, and requested that it
might be given to Mrs Reardon as soon as possible. With one more hasty
glance at the window--Amy was perhaps enjoying her unwonted comfort--he
walked quickly away.

As he re-entered what had been his home, its bareness made his heart
sink. An hour or two had sufficed for this devastation; nothing remained
upon the uncarpeted floors but the needments he would carry with him
into the wilderness, such few evidences of civilisation as the poorest
cannot well dispense with. Anger, revolt, a sense of outraged love--all
manner of confused passions had sustained him throughout this day of
toil; now he had leisure to know how faint he was. He threw himself upon
his chair-bedstead, and lay for more than an hour in torpor of body and
mind.

But before he could sleep he must eat. Though it was cold, he could
not exert himself to light a fire; there was some food still in the
cupboard, and he consumed it in the fashion of a tired labourer, with
the plate on his lap, using his fingers and a knife. What had he to do
with delicacies?

He felt utterly alone in the world. Unless it were Biffen, what mortal
would give him kindly welcome under any roof? These stripped rooms
were symbolical of his life; losing money, he had lost everything. 'Be
thankful that you exist, that these morsels of food are still granted
you. Man has a right to nothing in this world that he cannot pay for.
Did you imagine that love was an exception? Foolish idealist! Love is
one of the first things to be frightened away by poverty. Go and live
upon your twelve-and-sixpence a week, and on your memories of the past.'

In this room he had sat with Amy on their return from the wedding
holiday. 'Shall you always love me as you do now?'--'For ever! for
ever!'--'Even if I disappointed you? If I failed?'--'How could that
affect my love?' The voices seemed to be lingering still, in a sad,
faint echo, so short a time it was since those words were uttered.

His own fault. A man has no business to fail; least of all can he expect
others to have time to look back upon him or pity him if he sink under
the stress of conflict. Those behind will trample over his body; they
can't help it; they themselves are borne onwards by resistless pressure.

He slept for a few hours, then lay watching the light of dawn as it
revealed his desolation.

The morning's post brought him a large heavy envelope, the aspect of
which for a moment puzzled him. But he recognised the handwriting, and
understood. The editor of The Wayside, in a pleasantly-written note,
begged to return the paper on Pliny's Letters which had recently
been submitted to him; he was sorry it did not strike him as quite so
interesting as the other contributions from Reardon's pen.

This was a trifle. For the first time he received a rejected piece of
writing without distress; he even laughed at the artistic completeness
of the situation. The money would have been welcome, but on that very
account he might have known it would not come.

The cart that was to transfer his property to the room in Islington
arrived about mid-day. By that time he had dismissed the last details of
business in relation to the flat, and was free to go back to the obscure
world whence he had risen. He felt that for two years and a half he had
been a pretender. It was not natural to him to live in the manner of
people who enjoy an assured income; he belonged to the class of casual
wage-earners. Back to obscurity!

Carrying a bag which contained a few things best kept in his own care,
he went by train to King's Cross, and thence walked up Pentonville
Hill to Upper Street and his own little by-way. Manville Street was not
unreasonably squalid; the house in which he had found a home was not
alarming in its appearance, and the woman who kept it had an honest
face. Amy would have shrunk in apprehension, but to one who had
experience of London garrets this was a rather favourable specimen of
its kind. The door closed more satisfactorily than poor Biffen's, for
instance, and there were not many of those knot-holes in the floor which
gave admission to piercing little draughts; not a pane of the window
was cracked, not one. A man might live here comfortably--could memory be
destroyed.

'There's a letter come for you,' said the landlady as she admitted him.
'You'll find it on your mantel.'

He ascended hastily. The letter must be from Amy, as no one else knew
his address. Yes, and its contents were these:

'As you have really sold the furniture, I shall accept half this money
that you send. I must buy clothing for myself and Willie. But the other
ten pounds I shall return to you as soon as possible. As for your
offer of half what you are to receive from Mr Carter, that seems to me
ridiculous; in any case, I cannot take it. If you seriously abandon
all further hope from literature, I think it is your duty to make every
effort to obtain a position suitable to a man of your education.--AMY
REARDON.'

Doubtless Amy thought it was her duty to write in this way. Not a word
of sympathy; he must understand that no one was to blame but himself;
and that her hardships were equal to his own.

In the bag he had brought with him there were writing materials.
Standing at the mantelpiece, he forthwith penned a reply to this letter:

'The money is for your support, as far as it will go. If it comes back
to me I shall send it again. If you refuse to make use of it, you
will have the kindness to put it aside and consider it as belonging
to Willie. The other money of which I spoke will be sent to you once a
month. As our concerns are no longer between us alone, I must protect
myself against anyone who would be likely to accuse me of not giving you
what I could afford. For your advice I thank you, but remember that in
withdrawing from me your affection you have lost all right to offer me
counsel.'

He went out and posted this at once.

By three o'clock the furniture of his room was arranged. He had not kept
a carpet; that was luxury, and beyond his due. His score of volumes must
rank upon the mantelpiece; his clothing must be kept in the trunk. Cups,
plates, knives, forks, and spoons would lie in the little open cupboard,
the lowest section of which was for his supply of coals. When everything
was in order he drew water from a tap on the landing and washed himself;
then, with his bag, went out to make purchases. A loaf of bread, butter,
sugar, condensed milk; a remnant of tea he had brought with him. On
returning, he lit as small a fire as possible, put on his kettle, and
sat down to meditate.

How familiar it all was to him! And not unpleasant, for it brought
back the days when he had worked to such good purpose. It was like a
restoration of youth.

Of Amy he would not think. Knowing his bitter misery, she could write
to him in cold, hard words, without a touch even of womanly feeling. If
ever they were to meet again, the advance must be from her side. He had
no more tenderness for her until she strove to revive it.

Next morning he called at the hospital to see Carter. The secretary's
peculiar look and smile seemed to betray a knowledge of what had been
going on since Sunday, and his first words confirmed this impression of
Reardon's.

'You have removed, I hear?'

'Yes; I had better give you my new address.'

Reardon's tone was meant to signify that further remark on the subject
would be unwelcome. Musingly, Carter made a note of the address.

'You still wish to go on with this affair?'

'Certainly.'

'Come and have some lunch with me, then, and afterwards we'll go to the
City Road and talk things over on the spot.'

The vivacious young man was not quite so genial as of wont, but he
evidently strove to show that the renewal of their relations as employer
and clerk would make no difference in the friendly intercourse which
had since been established; the invitation to lunch evidently had this
purpose.

'I suppose,' said Carter, when they were seated in a restaurant, 'you
wouldn't object to anything better, if a chance turned up?'

'I should take it, to be sure.'

'But you don't want a job that would occupy all your time? You're going
on with writing, of course?'

'Not for the present, I think.'

'Then you would like me to keep a look-out? I haven't anything in
view--nothing whatever. But one hears of things sometimes.'

'I should be obliged to you if you could help me to anything
satisfactory.'

Having brought himself to this admission, Reardon felt more at ease. To
what purpose should he keep up transparent pretences? It was manifestly
his duty to earn as much money as he could, in whatever way. Let the
man of letters be forgotten; he was seeking for remunerative employment,
just as if he had never written a line.

Amy did not return the ten pounds, and did not write again. So,
presumably, she would accept the moiety of his earnings; he was glad
of it. After paying half-a-crown for rent, there would be left ten
shillings. Something like three pounds that still remained to him he
would not reckon; this must be for casualties.

Half-a-sovereign was enough for his needs; in the old times he had
counted it a competency which put his mind quite at rest.

The day came, and he entered upon his duties in City Road. It needed but
an hour or two, and all the intervening time was cancelled; he was
back once more in the days of no reputation, a harmless clerk, a decent
wage-earner.



CHAPTER XX. THE END OF WAITING

It was more than a fortnight after Reardon's removal to Islington when
Jasper Milvain heard for the first time of what had happened. He was
coming down from the office of the Will-o'-the-Wisp one afternoon,
after a talk with the editor concerning a paragraph in his last week's
causerie which had been complained of as libellous, and which would
probably lead to the 'case' so much desired by everyone connected with
the paper, when someone descending from a higher storey of the building
overtook him and laid a hand on his shoulder. He turned and saw
Whelpdale.

'What brings you on these premises?' he asked, as they shook hands.

'A man I know has just been made sub-editor of Chat, upstairs. He has
half promised to let me do a column of answers to correspondents.'

'Cosmetics? Fashions? Cookery?'

'I'm not so versatile as all that, unfortunately. No, the general
information column. "Will you be so good as to inform me, through the
medium of your invaluable paper, what was the exact area devastated
by the Great Fire of London?"--that kind of thing, you know.
Hopburn--that's the fellow's name--tells me that his predecessor always
called the paper Chat-moss, because of the frightful difficulty he had
in filling it up each week. By-the-bye, what a capital column that is of
yours in Will-o'-the-Wisp. I know nothing like it in English journalism;
upon my word I don't!'

'Glad you like it. Some people are less fervent in their admiration.'

Jasper recounted the affair which had just been under discussion in the
office.

'It may cost a couple of thousands, but the advertisement is worth that,
Patwin thinks. Barlow is delighted; he wouldn't mind paying double the
money to make those people a laughing-stock for a week or two.'

They issued into the street, and walked on together; Milvain, with
his keen eye and critical smile, unmistakably the modern young man who
cultivates the art of success; his companion of a less pronounced type,
but distinguished by a certain subtlety of countenance, a blending of
the sentimental and the shrewd.

'Of course you know all about the Reardons?' said Whelpdale.

'Haven't seen or heard of them lately. What is it?'

'Then you don't know that they have parted?'

'Parted?'

'I only heard about it last night; Biffen told me. Reardon is doing
clerk's work at a hospital somewhere in the East-end, and his wife has
gone to live at her mother's house.'

'Ho, ho!' exclaimed Jasper, thoughtfully. 'Then the crash has come. Of
course I knew it must be impending. I'm sorry for Reardon.'

'I'm sorry for his wife.'

'Trust you for thinking of women first, Whelpdale.'

'It's in an honourable way, my dear fellow. I'm a slave to women, true,
but all in an honourable way. After that last adventure of mine most
men would be savage and cynical, wouldn't they, now? I'm nothing of the
kind. I think no worse of women--not a bit. I reverence them as much as
ever. There must be a good deal of magnanimity in me, don't you think?'

Jasper laughed unrestrainedly.

'But it's the simple truth,' pursued the other. 'You should have
seen the letter I wrote to that girl at Birmingham--all charity and
forgiveness. I meant it, every word of it. I shouldn't talk to everyone
like this, you know; but it's as well to show a friend one's best
qualities now and then.'

'Is Reardon still living at the old place?'

'No, no. They sold up everything and let the flat. He's in lodgings
somewhere or other. I'm not quite intimate enough with him to go and see
him under the circumstances. But I'm surprised you know nothing about
it.'

'I haven't seen much of them this year. Reardon--well, I'm afraid he
hasn't very much of the virtue you claim for yourself. It rather annoys
him to see me going ahead.'

'Really? His character never struck me in that way.'

'You haven't come enough in contact with him. At all events, I can't
explain his change of manner in any other way. But I'm sorry for him;
I am, indeed. At a hospital? I suppose Carter has given him the old job
again?'

'Don't know. Biffen doesn't talk very freely about it; there's a good
deal of delicacy in Biffen, you know. A thoroughly good-hearted fellow.
And so is Reardon, I believe, though no doubt he has his weaknesses.'

'Oh, an excellent fellow! But weakness isn't the word. Why, I foresaw
all this from the very beginning. The first hour's talk I ever had
with him was enough to convince me that he'd never hold his own. But he
really believed that the future was clear before him; he imagined he'd
go on getting more and more for his books. An extraordinary thing that
that girl had such faith in him!'

They parted soon after this, and Milvain went homeward, musing upon what
he had heard. It was his purpose to spend the whole evening on some
work which pressed for completion, but he found an unusual difficulty
in settling to it. About eight o'clock he gave up the effort, arrayed
himself in the costume of black and white, and journeyed to Westbourne
Park, where his destination was the house of Mrs Edmund Yule. Of the
servant who opened to him he inquired if Mrs Yule was at home, and
received an answer in the affirmative.

'Any company with her?'

'A lady--Mrs Carter.'

'Then please to give my name, and ask if Mrs Yule can see me.'

He was speedily conducted to the drawing-room, where he found the lady
of the house, her son, and Mrs Carter. For Mrs Reardon his eye sought in
vain.

'I'm so glad you have come,' said Mrs Yule, in a confidential tone. 'I
have been wishing to see you. Of course, you know of our sad trouble?'

'I have heard of it only to-day.'

'From Mr Reardon himself?'

'No; I haven't seen him.'

'I do wish you had! We should have been so anxious to know how he
impressed you.'

'How he impressed me?'

'My mother has got hold of the notion,' put in John Yule, 'that he's not
exactly compos mentis. I'll admit that he went on in a queer sort of way
the last time I saw him.'

'And my husband thinks he is rather strange,' remarked Mrs Carter.

'He has gone back to the hospital, I understand--'

'To a new branch that has just been opened in the City Road,' replied
Mrs Yule. 'And he's living in a dreadful place--one of the most shocking
alleys in the worst part of Islington. I should have gone to see him,
but I really feel afraid; they give me such an account of the place.
And everyone agrees that he has such a very wild look, and speaks so
strangely.'

'Between ourselves,' said John, 'there's no use in exaggerating. He's
living in a vile hole, that's true, and Carter says he looks miserably
ill, but of course he may be as sane as we are.

Jasper listened to all this with no small astonishment.

'And Mrs Reardon?' he asked.

'I'm sorry to say she is far from well,' replied Mrs Yule. 'To-day she
has been obliged to keep her room. You can imagine what a shock it has
been to her. It came with such extraordinary suddenness. Without a word
of warning, her husband announced that he had taken a clerkship and was
going to remove immediately to the East-end. Fancy! And this when he had
already arranged, as you know, to go to the South Coast and write his
next book under the influences of the sea air. He was anything but well;
we all knew that, and we had all joined in advising him to spend the
summer at the seaside. It seemed better that he should go alone; Mrs
Reardon would, of course, have gone down for a few days now and then.
And at a moment's notice everything is changed, and in such a dreadful
way! I cannot believe that this is the behaviour of a sane man!'

Jasper understood that an explanation of the matter might have been
given in much more homely terms; it was natural that Mrs Yule
should leave out of sight the sufficient, but ignoble, cause of her
son-in-law's behaviour.

'You see in what a painful position we are placed,' continued the
euphemistic lady. 'It is so terrible even to hint that Mr Reardon is not
responsible for his actions, yet how are we to explain to our friends
this extraordinary state of things?'

'My husband is afraid Mr Reardon may fall seriously ill,' said Mrs
Carter. 'And how dreadful! In such a place as that!'

'It would be so kind of you to go and see him, Mr Milvain,' urged Mrs
Yule. 'We should be so glad to hear what you think.'

'Certainly, I will go,' replied Jasper. 'Will you give me his address?'

He remained for an hour, and before his departure the subject was
discussed with rather more frankness than at first; even the word
'money' was once or twice heard.

'Mr Carter has very kindly promised,' said Mrs Yule, 'to do his best to
hear of some position that would be suitable. It seems a most shocking
thing that a successful author should abandon his career in this
deliberate way; who could have imagined anything of the kind two
years ago? But it is clearly quite impossible for him to go on as
at present--if there is really no reason for believing his mind
disordered.'

A cab was summoned for Mrs Carter, and she took her leave, suppressing
her native cheerfulness to the tone of the occasion. A minute or two
after, Milvain left the house.

He had walked perhaps twenty yards, almost to the end of the silent
street in which his friends' house was situated, when a man came round
the corner and approached him. At once he recognised the figure, and in
a moment he was face to face with Reardon. Both stopped. Jasper held out
his hand, but the other did not seem to notice it.

'You are coming from Mrs Yule's?' said Reardon, with a strange smile.

By the gaslight his face showed pale and sunken, and he met Jasper's
look with fixedness.

'Yes, I am. The fact is, I went there to hear of your address. Why
haven't you let me know about all this?'

'You went to the flat?'

'No, I was told about you by Whelpdale.'

Reardon turned in the direction whence he had come, and began to walk
slowly; Jasper kept beside him.

'I'm afraid there's something amiss between us, Reardon,' said the
latter, just glancing at his companion.

'There's something amiss between me and everyone,' was the reply, in an
unnatural voice.

'You look at things too gloomily. Am I detaining you, by-the-bye? You
were going--'

'Nowhere.'

'Then come to my rooms, and let us see if we can't talk more in the old
way.'

'Your old way of talk isn't much to my taste, Milvain. It has cost me
too much.'Jasper gazed at him. Was there some foundation for Mrs Yule's
seeming extravagance? This reply sounded so meaningless, and so unlike
Reardon's manner of speech, that the younger man experienced a sudden
alarm.

'Cost you too much? I don't understand you.'

They had turned into a broader thoroughfare, which, however, was little
frequented at this hour. Reardon, his hands thrust into the pockets of
a shabby overcoat and his head bent forward, went on at a slow pace,
observant of nothing. For a moment or two he delayed reply, then said in
an unsteady voice:

'Your way of talking has always been to glorify success, to insist upon
it as the one end a man ought to keep in view. If you had talked so to
me alone, it wouldn't have mattered. But there was generally someone
else present. Your words had their effect; I can see that now. It's very
much owing to you that I am deserted, now that there's no hope of my
ever succeeding.'

Jasper's first impulse was to meet this accusation with indignant
denial, but a sense of compassion prevailed. It was so painful to see
the defeated man wandering at night near the house where his wife
and child were comfortably sheltered; and the tone in which he spoke
revealed such profound misery.

'That's a most astonishing thing to say,' Jasper replied. 'Of course I
know nothing of what has passed between you and your wife, but I feel
certain that I have no more to do with what has happened than any other
of your acquaintances.'

'You may feel as certain as you will, but your words and your example
have influenced my wife against me. You didn't intend that; I don't
suppose it for a moment. It's my misfortune, that's all.'

'That I intended nothing of the kind, you need hardly say, I should
think. But you are deceiving yourself in the strangest way. I'm afraid
to speak plainly; I'm afraid of offending you. But can you recall
something that I said about the time of your marriage? You didn't like
it then, and certainly it won't be pleasant to you to remember it now.
If you mean that your wife has grown unkind to you because you are
unfortunate, there's no need to examine into other people's influence
for an explanation of that.'

Reardon turned his face towards the speaker.

'Then you have always regarded my wife as a woman likely to fail me in
time of need?'

'I don't care to answer a question put in that way. If we are no longer
to talk with the old friendliness, it's far better we shouldn't discuss
things such as this.'

'Well, practically you have answered. Of course I remember those words
of yours that you refer to. Whether you were right or wrong doesn't
affect what I say.'

He spoke with a dull doggedness, as though mental fatigue did not allow
him to say more.

'It's impossible to argue against such a charge,' said Milvain. 'I am
convinced it isn't true, and that's all I can answer. But perhaps you
think this extraordinary influence of mine is still being used against
you?'

'I know nothing about it,' Reardon replied, in the same unmodulated
voice.

'Well, as I have told you, this was my first visit to Mrs Yule's since
your wife has been there, and I didn't see her; she isn't very well,
and keeps her room. I'm glad it happened so--that I didn't meet her.
Henceforth I shall keep away from the family altogether, so long, at all
events, as your wife remains with them. Of course I shan't tell anyone
why; that would be impossible. But you shan't have to fear that I am
decrying you. By Jove! an amiable figure you make of me!'

'I have said what I didn't wish to say, and what I oughtn't to have
said. You must misunderstand me; I can't help it.'

Reardon had been walking for hours, and was, in truth, exhausted.

He became mute. Jasper, whose misrepresentation was wilful, though not
maliciously so, also fell into silence; he did not believe that his
conversations with Amy had seriously affected the course of events,
but he knew that he had often said things to her in private which
would scarcely have fallen from his lips if her husband had been
present--little depreciatory phrases, wrong rather in tone than in
terms, which came of his irresistible desire to assume superiority
whenever it was possible. He, too, was weak, but with quite another
kind of weakness than Reardon's. His was the weakness of vanity, which
sometimes leads a man to commit treacheries of which he would believe
himself incapable. Self-accused, he took refuge in the pretence of
misconception, which again was a betrayal of littleness.

They drew near to Westbourne Park station.

'You are living a long way from here,' Jasper said, coldly. 'Are you
going by train?'

'No. You said my wife was ill?'

'Oh, not ill. At least, I didn't understand that it was anything
serious. Why don't you walk back to the house?'

'I must judge of my own affairs.'

'True; I beg your pardon. I take the train here, so I'll say
good-night.'

They nodded to each other, but did not shake hands.

A day or two later, Milvain wrote to Mrs Yule, and told her that he
had seen Reardon; he did not describe the circumstances under which the
interview had taken place, but gave it as his opinion that Reardon
was in a state of nervous illness, and made by suffering quite unlike
himself. That he might be on the way to positive mental disease seemed
likely enough. 'Unhappily, I myself can be of no use to him; he has
not the same friendly feeling for me as he used to have. But it is
very certain that those of his friends who have the power should exert
themselves to raise him out of this fearful slough of despond. If he
isn't effectually helped, there's no saying what may happen. One thing
is certain, I think: he is past helping himself. Sane literary work
cannot be expected from him. It seems a monstrous thing that so good a
fellow, and one with such excellent brains too, should perish by the
way when influential people would have no difficulty in restoring him to
health and usefulness.'

All the months of summer went by. Jasper kept his word, and never
visited Mrs Yule's house; but once in July he met that lady at the
Carters', and heard then, what he knew from other sources, that the
position of things was unchanged. In August, Mrs Yule spent a fortnight
at the seaside, and Amy accompanied her. Milvain and his sisters
accepted an invitation to visit friends at Wattleborough, and were out
of town about three weeks, the last ten days being passed in the Isle of
Wight; it was an extravagant holiday, but Dora had been ailing, and her
brother declared that they would all work better for the change. Alfred
Yule, with his wife and daughter, rusticated somewhere in Kent. Dora and
Marian exchanged letters, and here is a passage from one written by the
former:

'Jasper has shown himself in an unusually amiable light since we left
town. I looked forward to this holiday with some misgivings, as I know
by experience that it doesn't do for him and us to be too much together;
he gets tired of our company, and then his selfishness--believe me, he
has a good deal of it--comes out in a way we don't appreciate. But I
have never known him so forbearing. To me he is particularly kind, on
account of my headaches and general shakiness. It isn't impossible that
this young man, if all goes well with him, may turn out far better than
Maud and I ever expected. But things will have to go very well, if the
improvement is to be permanent. I only hope he may make a lot of money
before long. If this sounds rather gross to you, I can only say that
Jasper's moral nature will never be safe as long as he is exposed to
the risks of poverty. There are such people, you know. As a poor man, I
wouldn't trust him out of my sight; with money, he will be a tolerable
creature--as men go.'

Dora, no doubt, had her reasons for writing in this strain. She would
not have made such remarks in conversation with her friend, but took the
opportunity of being at a distance to communicate them in writing.

On their return, the two girls made good progress with the book they
were manufacturing for Messrs Jolly and Monk, and early in October it
was finished. Dora was now writing little things for The English Girl,
and Maud had begun to review an occasional novel for an illustrated
paper. In spite of their poor lodgings, they had been brought into
social relations with Mrs Boston Wright and a few of her friends; their
position was understood, and in accepting invitations they had no fear
lest unwelcome people should pounce down upon them in their shabby
little sitting-room. The younger sister cared little for society such
as Jasper procured them; with Marian Yule for a companion she would have
been quite content to spend her evenings at home. But Maud relished the
introduction to strangers. She was admired, and knew it. Prudence
could not restrain her from buying a handsomer dress than those she had
brought from her country home, and it irked her sorely that she might
not reconstruct all her equipment to rival the appearance of well-to-do
girls whom she studied and envied. Her disadvantages, for the present,
were insuperable. She had no one to chaperon her; she could not form
intimacies because of her poverty. A rare invitation to luncheon, a
permission to call at the sacred hour of small-talk--this was all she
could hope for.

'I advise you to possess your soul in patience,' Jasper said to her,
as they talked one day on the sea-shore. 'You are not to blame that you
live without conventional protection, but it necessitates your being
very careful. These people you are getting to know are not rigid about
social observances, and they won't exactly despise you for poverty; all
the same, their charity mustn't be tested too severely. Be very quiet
for the present; let it be seen that you understand that your position
isn't quite regular--I mean, of course, do so in a modest and nice
way. As soon as ever it's possible, we'll arrange for you to live with
someone who will preserve appearances. All this is contemptible,
of course; but we belong to a contemptible society, and can't help
ourselves. For Heaven's sake, don't spoil your chances by rashness; be
content to wait a little, till some more money comes in.'

Midway in October, about half-past eight one evening, Jasper received
an unexpected visit from Dora. He was in his sitting-room, smoking and
reading a novel.

'Anything wrong?' he asked, as his sister entered.

'No; but I'm alone this evening, and I thought I would see if you were
in.

'Where's Maud, then?'

'She went to see the Lanes this afternoon, and Mrs Lane invited her
to go to the Gaiety to-night; she said a friend whom she had invited
couldn't come, and the ticket would be wasted. Maud went back to dine
with them. She'll come home in a cab.'

'Why is Mrs Lane so affectionate all at once? Take your things off; I
have nothing to do.'

'Miss Radway was going as well.'

'Who's Miss Radway?'

'Don't you know her? She's staying with the Lanes. Maud says she writes
for The West End.'

'And will that fellow Lane be with them?'

'I think not.'

Jasper mused, contemplating the bowl of his pipe.

'I suppose she was in rare excitement?'

'Pretty well. She has wanted to go to the Gaiety for a long time.
There's no harm, is there?'

Dora asked the question with that absent air which girls are wont to
assume when they touch on doubtful subjects.

'Harm, no. Idiocy and lively music, that's all. It's too late, or I'd
have taken you, for the joke of the thing. Confound it! she ought to
have better dresses.'

'Oh, she looked very nice, in that best.'

'Pooh! But I don't care for her to be running about with the Lanes. Lane
is too big a blackguard; it reflects upon his wife to a certain extent.'

They gossiped for half an hour, then a tap at the door interrupted them;
it was the landlady.

'Mr Whelpdale has called to see you, sir. I mentioned as Miss Milvain
was here, so he said he wouldn't come up unless you sent to ask him.'

Jasper smiled at Dora, and said in a low voice.

'What do you say? Shall he come up? He can behave himself.'

'Just as you please, Jasper.'

'Ask him to come up, Mrs Thompson, please.'

Mr Whelpdale presented himself. He entered with much more ceremony than
when Milvain was alone; on his visage was a grave respectfulness, his
step was light, his whole bearing expressed diffidence and pleasurable
anticipation.

'My younger sister, Whelpdale,' said Jasper, with subdued amusement.

The dealer in literary advice made a bow which did him no discredit, and
began to speak in a low, reverential tone not at all disagreeable to the
ear. His breeding, in truth, had been that of a gentleman, and it was
only of late years that he had fallen into the hungry region of New Grub
Street.

'How's the "Manual" going off?' Milvain inquired.

'Excellently! We have sold nearly six hundred.'

'My sister is one of your readers. I believe she has studied the book
with much conscientiousness.'

'Really? You have really read it, Miss Milvain?'

Dora assured him that she had, and his delight knew no bounds.

'It isn't all rubbish, by any means,' said Jasper, graciously. 'In the
chapter on writing for magazines, there are one or two very good hints.
What a pity you can't apply your own advice, Whelpdale!'

'Now that's horribly unkind of you!' protested the other. 'You might
have spared me this evening. But unfortunately it's quite true, Miss
Milvain. I point the way, but I haven't been able to travel it myself.
You mustn't think I have never succeeded in getting things published;
but I can't keep it up as a profession.

Your brother is the successful man. A marvellous facility! I envy him.
Few men at present writing have such talent.'

'Please don't make him more conceited than he naturally is,' interposed
Dora.

'What news of Biffen?' asked Jasper, presently.

'He says he shall finish "Mr Bailey, Grocer," in about a month. He read
me one of the later chapters the other night. It's really very fine;
most remarkable writing, it seems to me. It will be scandalous if he
can't get it published; it will, indeed.'

'I do hope he may!' said Dora, laughing. 'I have heard so much of "Mr
Bailey," that it will be a great disappointment if I am never to read
it.'

'I'm afraid it would give you very little pleasure,' Whelpdale replied,
hesitatingly. 'The matter is so very gross.'

'And the hero grocer!' shouted Jasper, mirthfully. 'Oh, but it's quite
decent; only rather depressing. The decently ignoble--or, the ignobly
decent? Which is Biffen's formula? I saw him a week ago, and he looked
hungrier than ever.'

'Ah, but poor Reardon! I passed him at King's Cross not long ago.

He didn't see me--walks with his eyes on the ground always--and I hadn't
the courage to stop him. He's the ghost of his old self He can't live
long.'

Dora and her brother exchanged a glance. It was a long time since Jasper
had spoken to his sisters about the Reardons; nowadays he seldom heard
either of husband or wife.

The conversation that went on was so agreeable to Whelpdale, that he
lost consciousness of time. It was past eleven o'clock when Jasper felt
obliged to remind him.

'Dora, I think I must be taking you home.'

The visitor at once made ready for departure, and his leave-taking was
as respectful as his entrance had been. Though he might not say what
he thought, there was very legible upon his countenance a hope that he
would again be privileged to meet Miss Dora Milvain.

'Not a bad fellow, in his way,' said Jasper, when Dora and he were alone
again.

'Not at all.'

She had heard the story of Whelpdale's hapless wooing half a year ago,
and her recollection of it explained the smile with which she spoke.

'Never get on, I'm afraid,' Jasper pursued. 'He has his allowance of
twenty pounds a year, and makes perhaps fifty or sixty more. If I were
in his position, I should go in for some kind of regular business; he
has people who could help him. Good-natured fellow; but what's the use
of that if you've no money?'

They set out together, and walked to the girls' lodgings. Dora was about
to use her latch-key, but Jasper checked her. 'No. There's a light in
the kitchen still; better knock, as we're so late.'

'But why?'

'Never mind; do as I tell you.'

The landlady admitted them, and Jasper spoke a word or two with her,
explaining that he would wait until his elder sister's return; the
darkness of the second-floor windows had shown that Maud was not yet
back.

'What strange fancies you have!' remarked Dora, when they were upstairs.

'So have people in general, unfortunately.'

A letter lay on the table. It was addressed to Maud, and Dora recognised
the handwriting as that of a Wattleborough friend.

'There must be some news here,' she said. 'Mrs Haynes wouldn't write
unless she had something special to say.

Just upon midnight, a cab drew up before the house. Dora ran down to
open the door to her sister, who came in with very bright eyes and more
colour than usual on her cheeks.

'How late for you to be here!' she exclaimed, on entering the
sitting-room and seeing Jasper.

'I shouldn't have felt comfortable till I knew that you were back all
right.'

'What fear was there?'

She threw off her wraps, laughing.

'Well, have you enjoyed yourself?'

'Oh yes!' she replied, carelessly. 'This letter for me? What has Mrs
Haynes got to say, I wonder?'

She opened the envelope, and began to glance hurriedly over the sheet of
paper. Then her face changed.

'What do you think? Mr Yule is dead!'

Dora uttered an exclamation; Jasper displayed the keenest interest.

'He died yesterday--no, it would be the day before yesterday. He had a
fit of some kind at a public meeting, was taken to the hospital because
it was nearest, and died in a few hours. So that has come, at last! Now
what'll be the result of it, I wonder?'

'When shall you be seeing Marian?' asked her brother.

'She might come to-morrow evening.'

'But won't she go to the funeral?' suggested Dora.

'Perhaps; there's no saying. I suppose her father will, at all events.
The day before yesterday? Then the funeral will be on Saturday, I should
think.'

'Ought I to write to Marian?' asked Dora.

'No; I wouldn't,' was Jasper's reply. 'Better wait till she lets you
hear. That's sure to be soon. She may have gone to Wattleborough this
afternoon, or be going to-morrow morning.'

The letter from Mrs Haynes was passed from hand to hand. 'Everybody
feels sure,' it said, 'that a great deal of his money will be left for
public purposes. The ground for the park being already purchased, he is
sure to have made provision for carrying out his plans connected with
it. But I hope your friends in London may benefit.'

It was some time before Jasper could put an end to the speculative
conversation and betake himself homewards. And even on getting back to
his lodgings he was little disposed to go to bed. This event of John
Yule's death had been constantly in his mind, but there was always a
fear that it might not happen for long enough; the sudden announcement
excited him almost as much as if he were a relative of the deceased.

'Confound his public purposes!' was the thought upon which he at length
slept.



CHAPTER XXI. MR YULE LEAVES TOWN

Since the domestic incidents connected with that unpleasant review in
The Current, the relations between Alfred Yule and his daughter had
suffered a permanent change, though not in a degree noticeable by any
one but the two concerned. To all appearances, they worked together and
conversed very much as they had been wont to do; but Marian was made
to feel in many subtle ways that her father no longer had complete
confidence in her, no longer took the same pleasure as formerly in the
skill and conscientiousness of her work, and Yule on his side perceived
too clearly that the girl was preoccupied with something other than
her old wish to aid and satisfy him, that she had a new life of her own
alien to, and in some respects irreconcilable with, the existence
in which he desired to confirm her. There was no renewal of open
disagreement, but their conversations frequently ended by tacit mutual
consent, at a point which threatened divergence; and in Yule's case
every such warning was a cause of intense irritation. He feared to
provoke Marian, and this fear was again a torture to his pride.

Beyond the fact that his daughter was in constant communication with
the Miss Milvains, he knew, and could discover, nothing of the terms on
which she stood with the girls' brother, and this ignorance was harder
to bear than full assurance of a disagreeable fact would have been. That
a man like Jasper Milvain, whose name was every now and then forced
upon his notice as a rising periodicalist and a faithful henchman of
the unspeakable Fadge--that a young fellow of such excellent prospects
should seriously attach himself to a girl like Marian seemed to him
highly improbable, save, indeed, for the one consideration, that
Milvain, who assuredly had a very keen eye to chances, might regard the
girl as a niece of old John Yule, and therefore worth holding in view
until it was decided whether or not she would benefit by her uncle's
decease. Fixed in his antipathy to the young man, he would not allow
himself to admit any but a base motive on Milvain's side, if, indeed,
Marian and Jasper were more to each other than slight acquaintances; and
he persuaded himself that anxiety for the girl's welfare was at least
as strong a motive with him as mere prejudice against the ally of Fadge,
and, it might be, the reviewer of 'English Prose.' Milvain was quite
capable of playing fast and loose with a girl, and Marian, owing to the
peculiar circumstances of her position, would easily be misled by the
pretence of a clever speculator.

That she had never spoken again about the review in The Current might
receive several explanations. Perhaps she had not been able to convince
herself either for or against Milvain's authorship; perhaps she had
reason to suspect that the young man was the author; perhaps she merely
shrank from reviving a discussion in which she might betray what she
desired to keep secret. This last was the truth. Finding that her father
did not recur to the subject, Marian concluded that he had found himself
to be misinformed. But Yule, though he heard the original rumour denied
by people whom in other matters he would have trusted, would not lay
aside the doubt that flattered his prejudices. If Milvain were not the
writer of the review, he very well might have been; and what certainty
could be arrived at in matters of literary gossip?

There was an element of jealousy in the father's feeling. If he did not
love Marian with all the warmth of which a parent is capable, at least
he had more affection for her than for any other person, and of this he
became strongly aware now that the girl seemed to be turning from him.
If he lost Marian, he would indeed be a lonely man, for he considered
his wife of no account.

Intellectually again, he demanded an entire allegiance from his
daughter; he could not bear to think that her zeal on his behalf was
