in lament for the loss of his manuscript. He would have pursued the
fruitless search, but his companion, who feared that the fire might
spread to adjoining houses, insisted on his passing through the
trap-door and descending the stairs.'If the coat fell into the street,'
Biffen said, when they were down on the ground floor, 'of course it's
lost; it would be stolen at once. But may not it have fallen into your
back yard?'

He was standing in the midst of a cluster of alarmed people, who stared
at him in astonishment, for the reek through which he had fought his way
had given him the aspect of a sweep. His suggestion prompted someone to
run into the yard, with the result that a muddy bundle was brought in
and exhibited to him.

'Is this your coat, Mister?'

'Heaven be thanked! That's it! There are valuable papers in the
pockets.'

He unrolled the garment, felt to make sure that 'Mr Bailey' was safe,
and finally put it on.

'Will anyone here let me sit down in a room and give me a drink of
water?' he asked, feeling now as if he must drop with exhaustion.

The man who had rescued him performed this further kindness, and for
half an hour, whilst tumult indescribable raged about him, Biffen sat
recovering his strength. By that time the firemen were hard at work, but
one floor of the burning house had already fallen through, and it was
probable that nothing but the shell would be saved. After giving a full
account of himself to the people among whom he had come, Harold declared
his intention of departing; his need of repose was imperative, and he
could not hope for it in this proximity to the fire. As he had no money,
his only course was to inquire for a room at some house in the immediate
neighbourhood, where the people would receive him in a charitable
spirit.

With the aid of the police he passed to where the crowd was thinner, and
came out into Cleveland Street. Here most of the house-doors were open,
and he made several applications for hospitality, but either his story
was doubted or his grimy appearance predisposed people against him. At
length, when again his strength was all but at an end, he made appeal to
a policeman.

'Surely you can tell,' he protested, after explaining his position,
'that I don't want to cheat anybody. I shall have money to-morrow. If
no one will take me in you must haul me on some charge to the
police-station; I shall have to lie down on the pavement in a minute.'

The officer recognised a man who was standing half-dressed on a
threshold close by; he stepped up to him and made representations
which were successful. In a few minutes Biffen took possession of an
underground room furnished as a bedchamber, which he agreed to rent for
a week. His landlord was not ungracious, and went so far as to supply
him with warm water, that he might in a measure cleanse himself. This
operation rapidly performed, the hapless author flung himself into bed,
and before long was fast asleep.

When he went upstairs about nine o'clock in the morning he discovered
that his host kept an oil-shop.

'Lost everything, have you?' asked the man sympathetically.

'Everything, except the clothes I wear and some papers that I managed to
save. All my books burnt!'

Biffen shook his head dolorously.

'Your account-books!' cried the dealer in oil. 'Dear, dear!--and what
might your business be?'

The author corrected this misapprehension. In the end he was invited to
break his fast, which he did right willingly. Then, with assurances
that he would return before nightfall, he left the house. His steps were
naturally first directed to Clipstone Street; the familiar abode was a
gruesome ruin, still smoking. Neighbours informed him that Mr Briggs's
body had been brought forth in a horrible condition; but this was the
only loss of life that had happened.

Thence he struck eastward, and at eleven came to Manville Street,
Islington. He found Reardon by the fireside, looking very ill, and
speaking with hoarseness.

'Another cold?'

'It looks like it. I wish you would take the trouble to go and buy me
some vermin-killer. That would suit my case.'

'Then what would suit mine? Behold me, undeniably a philosopher; in the
literal sense of the words omnia mea mecum porto.'

He recounted his adventures, and with such humorous vivacity that when
he ceased the two laughed together as if nothing more amusing had ever
been heard.

'Ah, but my books, my books!' exclaimed Biffen, with a genuine groan.
'And all my notes! At one fell swoop! If I didn't laugh, old friend, I
should sit down and cry; indeed I should. All my classics, with years of
scribbling in the margins! How am I to buy them again?'

'You rescued "Mr Bailey." He must repay you.'

Biffen had already laid the manuscript on the table; it was dirty and
crumpled, but not to such an extent as to render copying necessary.
Lovingly he smoothed the pages and set them in order, then he wrapped
the whole in a piece of brown paper which Reardon supplied, and wrote
upon it the address of a firm of publishers.

'Have you note-paper? I'll write to them; impossible to call in my
present guise.'

Indeed his attire was more like that of a bankrupt costermonger than of
a man of letters. Collar he had none, for the griminess of that he wore
last night had necessitated its being thrown aside; round his throat
was a dirty handkerchief. His coat had been brushed, but its recent
experiences had brought it one stage nearer to that dissolution which
must very soon be its fate. His grey trousers were now black, and his
boots looked as if they had not been cleaned for weeks.

'Shall I say anything about the character of the book?' he asked,
seating himself with pen and paper. 'Shall I hint that it deals with the
ignobly decent?'

'Better let them form their own judgment,' replied Reardon, in his
hoarse voice.

'Then I'll just say that I submit to them a novel of modern life, the
scope of which is in some degree indicated by its title. Pity they can't
know how nearly it became a holocaust, and that I risked my life to save
it. If they're good enough to accept it I'll tell them the story. And
now, Reardon, I'm ashamed of myself, but can you without inconvenience
lend me ten shillings?'

'Easily.'

'I must write to two pupils, to inform them of my change of
address--from garret to cellar. And I must ask help from my prosperous
brother. He gives it me unreluctantly, I know, but I am always loth to
apply to him. May I use your paper for these purposes?'

The brother of whom he spoke was employed in a house of business at
Liverpool; the two had not met for years, but they corresponded,
and were on terms such as Harold indicated. When he had finished his
letters, and had received the half-sovereign from Reardon, he went his
way to deposit the brown-paper parcel at the publishers'. The clerk who
received it from his hands probably thought that the author might have
chosen a more respectable messenger.

Two days later, early in the evening, the friends were again enjoying
each other's company in Reardon's room. Both were invalids, for Biffen
had of course caught a cold from his exposure in shirt-sleeves on the
roof, and he was suffering from the shock to his nerves; but the thought
that his novel was safe in the hands of publishers gave him energy to
resist these influences. The absence of the pipe, for neither had any
palate for tobacco at present, was the only external peculiarity of
this meeting. There seemed no reason why they should not meet frequently
before the parting which would come at Christmas; but Reardon was in a
mood of profound sadness, and several times spoke as if already he were
bidding his friend farewell.

'I find it difficult to think,' he said, 'that you will always struggle
on in such an existence as this. To every man of mettle there does come
an opportunity, and it surely is time for yours to present itself. I
have a superstitious faith in "Mr Bailey." If he leads you to triumph,
don't altogether forget me.'

'Don't talk nonsense.'

'What ages it seems since that day when I saw you in the library at
Hastings, and heard you ask in vain for my book! And how grateful I was
to you! I wonder whether any mortal ever asks for my books nowadays?
Some day, when I am well established at Croydon, you shall go to
Mudie's, and make inquiry if my novels ever by any chance leave the
shelves, and then you shall give me a true and faithful report of the
answer you get. "He is quite forgotten," the attendant will say; be sure
of it.'

'I think not.'

'To have had even a small reputation, and to have outlived it, is a
sort of anticipation of death. The man Edwin Reardon, whose name was
sometimes spoken in a tone of interest, is really and actually dead. And
what remains of me is resigned to that. I have an odd fancy that it will
make death itself easier; it is as if only half of me had now to die.'

Biffen tried to give a lighter turn to the gloomy subject.

'Thinking of my fiery adventure,' he said, in his tone of dry
deliberation, 'I find it vastly amusing to picture you as a witness at
the inquest if I had been choked and consumed. No doubt it would have
been made known that I rushed upstairs to save some particular piece of
property--several people heard me say so--and you alone would be able to
conjecture what this was. Imagine the gaping wonderment of the coroner's
jury! The Daily Telegraph would have made a leader out of me. "This poor
man was so strangely deluded as to the value of a novel in manuscript,
which it appears he had just completed, that he positively sacrificed
his life in the endeavour to rescue it from the flames." And
the Saturday would have had a column of sneering jocosity on the
irrepressibly sanguine temperament of authors. At all events, I should
have had my day of fame.'

'But what an ignoble death it would have been!' he pursued. 'Perishing
in the garret of a lodging-house which caught fire by the overturning of
a drunkard's lamp! One would like to end otherwise.'

'Where would you wish to die?' asked Reardon, musingly.

'At home,' replied the other, with pathetic emphasis. 'I have never had
a home since I was a boy, and am never likely to have one. But to die at
home is an unreasoning hope I still cherish.'

'If you had never come to London, what would you have now been?'

'Almost certainly a schoolmaster in some small town. And one might be
worse off than that, you know.'

'Yes, one might live peaceably enough in such a position. And I--I
should be in an estate-agent's office, earning a sufficient salary, and
most likely married to some unambitious country girl.

I should have lived an intelligible life, instead of only trying to
live, aiming at modes of life beyond my reach. My mistake was that of
numberless men nowadays. Because I was conscious of brains, I thought
that the only place for me was London. It's easy enough to understand
this common delusion. We form our ideas of London from old literature;
we think of London as if it were still the one centre of intellectual
life; we think and talk like Chatterton. But the truth is that
intellectual men in our day do their best to keep away from London--when
once they know the place. There are libraries everywhere; papers and
magazines reach the north of Scotland as soon as they reach Brompton;
it's only on rare occasions, for special kinds of work, that one is
bound to live in London. And as for recreation, why, now that no English
theatre exists, what is there in London that you can't enjoy in almost
any part of England? At all events, a yearly visit of a week would be
quite sufficient for all the special features of the town. London is
only a huge shop, with an hotel on the upper storeys. To be sure, if you
make it your artistic subject, that's a different thing. But neither you
nor I would do that by deliberate choice.'

'I think not.'

'It's a huge misfortune, this will-o'-the-wisp attraction exercised
by London on young men of brains. They come here to be degraded, or to
perish, when their true sphere is a life of peaceful remoteness. The
type of man capable of success in London is more or less callous and
cynical. If I had the training of boys, I would teach them to think of
London as the last place where life can be lived worthily.'

'And the place where you are most likely to die in squalid
wretchedness.'

'The one happy result of my experiences,' said Reardon, is that they
have cured me of ambition. What a miserable fellow I should be if I were
still possessed with the desire to make a name! I can't even recall
very clearly that state of mind. My strongest desire now is for peaceful
obscurity. I am tired out; I want to rest for the remainder of my life.'

'You won't have much rest at Croydon.'

'Oh, it isn't impossible. My time will be wholly occupied in a round of
all but mechanical duties, and I think that will be the best medicine
for my mind. I shall read very little, and that only in the classics.
I don't say that I shall always be content in such a position; in a few
years perhaps something pleasanter will offer. But in the meantime
it will do very well. Then there is our expedition to Greece to look
forward to. I am quite in earnest about that. The year after next, if we
are both alive, assuredly we go.'

'The year after next.' Biffen smiled dubiously.

'I have demonstrated to you mathematically that it is possible.'

'You have; but so are a great many other things that one does not dare
to hope for.'

Someone knocked at the door, opened it, and said:

'Here's a telegram for you, Mr Reardon.'

The friends looked at each other, as if some fear had entered the minds
of both. Reardon opened the despatch. It was from his wife, and ran
thus:

'Willie is ill of diphtheria. Please come to us at once. I am staying
with Mrs Carter, at her mother's, at Brighton.'

The full address was given.

'You hadn't heard of her going there?' said Biffen, when he had read the
lines.

'No. I haven't seen Carter for several days, or perhaps he would
have told me. Brighton, at this time of year? But I believe there's
a fashionable "season" about now, isn't there? I suppose that would
account for it.'

He spoke in a slighting tone, but showed increasing agitation.

'Of course you will go?'

'I must. Though I'm in no condition for making a journey.'

His friend examined him anxiously.

'Are you feverish at all this evening?'

Reardon held out a hand that the other might feel his pulse. The beat
was rapid to begin with, and had been heightened since the arrival of
the telegram.

'But go I must. The poor little fellow has no great place in my heart,
but, when Amy sends for me, I must go. Perhaps things are at the worst.'

'When is there a train? Have you a time table?'

Biffen was despatched to the nearest shop to purchase one, and in the
meanwhile Reardon packed a few necessaries in a small travelling-bag,
ancient and worn, but the object of his affection because it had
accompanied him on his wanderings in the South. When Harold returned,
his appearance excited Reardon's astonishment--he was white from head to
foot.

'Snow?'

'It must have been falling heavily for an hour or more.'

'Can't be helped; I must go.'

The nearest station for departure was London Bridge, and the next train
left at 7.20. By Reardon's watch it was now about five minutes to seven.

'I don't know whether it's possible,' he said, in confused hurry, 'but I
must try. There isn't another train till ten past nine. Come with me to
the station, Biffen.'

Both were ready. They rushed from the house, and sped through the soft,
steady fall of snowflakes into Upper Street. Here they were several
minutes before they found a disengaged cab. Questioning the driver,
they learnt what they would have known very well already but for their
excitement: impossible to get to London Bridge Station in a quarter of
an hour.

'Better to go on, all the same,' was Reardon's opinion. 'If the snow
gets deep I shall perhaps not be able to have a cab at all. But you had
better not come; I forgot that you are as much out of sorts as I am.'

'How can you wait a couple of hours alone? In with you!'

'Diphtheria is pretty sure to be fatal to a child of that age, isn't
it?' Reardon asked when they were speeding along City Road.

'I'm afraid there's much danger.'

'Why did she send?'

'What an absurd question! You seem to have got into a thoroughly morbid
state of mind about her. Do be human, and put away your obstinate
folly.'

'In my position you would have acted precisely as I have done. I have
had no choice.'

'I might; but we have both of us too little practicality. The art
of living is the art of compromise. We have no right to foster
sensibilities, and conduct ourselves as if the world allowed of ideal
relations; it leads to misery for others as well as ourselves. Genial
coarseness is what it behoves men like you and me to cultivate. Your
reply to your wife's last letter was preposterous. You ought to have
gone to her of your own accord as soon as ever you heard she was
rich; she would have thanked you for such common-sense disregard of
delicacies. Let there be an end of this nonsense, I implore you!'

Reardon stared through the glass at the snow that fell thicker and
thicker.

'What are we--you and I?' pursued the other. 'We have no belief in
immortality; we are convinced that this life is all; we know that human
happiness is the origin and end of all moral considerations. What
right have we to make ourselves and others miserable for the sake of an
obstinate idealism? It is our duty to make the best of circumstances.
Why will you go cutting your loaf with a razor when you have a
serviceable bread-knife?'

Still Reardon did not speak. The cab rolled on almost silently.

'You love your wife, and this summons she sends is proof that her
thought turns to you as soon as she is in distress.'

'Perhaps she only thought it her duty to let the child's father know--'

'Perhaps--perhaps--perhaps!' cried Biffen, contemptuously. 'There goes
the razor again! Take the plain, human construction of what happens. Ask
yourself what the vulgar man would do, and do likewise; that's the only
safe rule for you.'

They were both hoarse with too much talking, and for the last half of
the drive neither spoke.

At the railway-station they ate and drank together, but with poor
pretence of appetite. As long as possible they kept within the warmed
rooms. Reardon was pale, and had anxious, restless eyes; he could not
remain seated, though when he had walked about for a few minutes the
trembling of his limbs obliged him to sink down. It was an unutterable
relief to both when the moment of the train's starting approached.

They clasped hands warmly, and exchanged a few last requests and
promises.

'Forgive my plain speech, old fellow,' said Biffen. 'Go and be happy!'

Then he stood alone on the platform, watching the red light on the last
carriage as the train whirled away into darkness and storm.



CHAPTER XXXII. REARDON BECOMES PRACTICAL

Reardon had never been to Brighton, and of his own accord never would
have gone; he was prejudiced against the place because its name has
become suggestive of fashionable imbecility and the snobbishness which
tries to model itself thereon; he knew that the town was a mere portion
of London transferred to the sea-shore, and as he loved the strand and
the breakers for their own sake, to think of them in such connection
could be nothing but a trial of his temper. Something of this species of
irritation affected him in the first part of his journey, and disturbed
the mood of kindliness with which he was approaching Amy; but towards
the end he forgot this in a growing desire to be beside his wife in her
trouble. His impatience made the hour and a half seem interminable.

The fever which was upon him had increased. He coughed frequently; his
breathing was difficult; though constantly moving, he felt as if, in
the absence of excitement, his one wish would have been to lie down and
abandon himself to lethargy. Two men who sat with him in the third-class
carriage had spread a rug over their knees and amused themselves with
playing cards for trifling sums of money; the sight of their foolish
faces, the sound of their laughs, the talk they interchanged,
exasperated him to the last point of endurance; but for all that he
could not draw his attention from them. He seemed condemned by some
spiritual tormentor to take an interest in their endless games, and to
observe their visages until he knew every line with a hateful intimacy.
One of the men had a moustache of unusual form; the ends curved upward
with peculiar suddenness, and Reardon was constrained to speculate as
to the mode of training by which this singularity had been produced. He
could have shed tears of nervous distraction in his inability to turn
his thoughts upon other things.

On alighting at his journey's end he was seized with a fit of shivering,
an intense and sudden chill which made his teeth chatter. In an
endeavour to overcome this he began to run towards the row of cabs, but
his legs refused such exercise, and coughing compelled him to pause for
breath. Still shaking, he threw himself into a vehicle and was driven to
the address Amy had mentioned. The snow on the ground lay thick, but no
more was falling.

Heedless of the direction which the cab took, he suffered his physical
and mental unrest for another quarter of an hour, then a stoppage told
him that the house was reached. On his way he had heard a clock strike
eleven.

The door opened almost as soon as he had rung the bell. He mentioned
his name, and the maid-servant conducted him to a drawing-room on the
ground-floor. The house was quite a small one, but seemed to be well
furnished. One lamp burned on the table, and the fire had sunk to a red
glow. Saying that she would inform Mrs Reardon at once, the servant left
him alone.

He placed his bag on the floor, took off his muffler, threw back his
overcoat, and sat waiting. The overcoat was new, but the garments
beneath it were his poorest, those he wore when sitting in his garret,
for he had neither had time to change them, nor thought of doing so.

He heard no approaching footstep but Amy came into the room in a way
which showed that she had hastened downstairs. She looked at him, then
drew near with both hands extended, and laid them on his shoulders, and
kissed him. Reardon shook so violently that it was all he could do to
remain standing; he seized one of her hands, and pressed it against his
lips.

'How hot your breath is!' she said. 'And how you tremble! Are you ill?'

'A bad cold, that's all,' he answered thickly, and coughed. 'How is
Willie?'

'In great danger. The doctor is coming again to-night; we thought that
was his ring.'

'You didn't expect me to-night?'

'I couldn't feel sure whether you would come.'

'Why did you send for me, Amy? Because Willie was in danger, and you
felt I ought to know about it?'

'Yes--and because I--'

She burst into tears. The display of emotion came very suddenly; her
words had been spoken in a firm voice, and only the pained knitting of
her brows had told what she was suffering.

'If Willie dies, what shall I do? Oh, what shall I do?' broke forth
between her sobs.

Reardon took her in his arms, and laid his hand upon her head in the old
loving way.

'Do you wish me to go up and see him, Amy?'

'Of course. But first, let me tell you why we are here. Edith--Mrs
Carter--was coming to spend a week with her mother, and she pressed
me to join her. I didn't really wish to; I was unhappy, and felt how
impossible it was to go on always living away from you. Oh, that I had
never come! Then Willie would have been as well as ever.'

'Tell me when and how it began.'

She explained briefly, then went on to tell of other circumstances.

'I have a nurse with me in the room. It's my own bedroom, and this house
is so small it will be impossible to give you a bed here, Edwin. But
there's an hotel only a few yards away.'

'Yes, yes; don't trouble about that.'

'But you look so ill--you are shaking so. Is it a cold you have had
long?'

'Oh, my old habit; you remember. One cold after another, all through the
accursed winter. What does that matter when you speak kindly to me once
more? I had rather die now at your feet and see the old gentleness when
you look at me, than live on estranged from you. No, don't kiss me, I
believe these vile sore-throats are contagious.'

'But your lips are so hot and parched! And to think of your coming this
journey, on such a night!'

'Good old Biffen came to the station with me. He was angry because I had
kept away from you so long. Have you given me your heart again, Amy?'

'Oh, it has all been a wretched mistake! But we were so poor. Now all
that is over; if only Willie can be saved to me! I am so anxious for
the doctor's coming; the poor little child can hardly draw a breath. How
cruel it is that such suffering should come upon a little creature who
has never done or thought ill!'

'You are not the first, dearest, who has revolted against nature's
cruelty.'

'Let us go up at once, Edwin. Leave your coat and things here. Mrs
Winter--Edith's mother--is a very old lady; she has gone to bed. And I
dare say you wouldn't care to see Mrs Carter to-night?'

'No, no! only you and Willie.'

'When the doctor comes hadn't you better ask his advice for yourself?'

'We shall see. Don't trouble about me.'

They went softly up to the first floor, and entered a bedroom.
Fortunately the light here was very dim, or the nurse who sat by the
child's bed must have wondered at the eccentricity with which her
patient's father attired himself. Bending over the little sufferer,
Reardon felt for the first time since Willie's birth a strong fatherly
emotion; tears rushed to his eyes, and he almost crushed Amy's hand as
he held it during the spasm of his intense feeling.

He sat here for a long time without speaking. The warmth of the chamber
had the reverse of an assuaging effect upon his difficult breathing and
his frequent short cough--it seemed to oppress and confuse his brain. He
began to feel a pain in his right side, and could not sit upright on the
chair.

Amy kept regarding him, without his being aware of it.

'Does your head ache?' she whispered.

He nodded, but did not speak.

'Oh, why doesn't the doctor come? I must send in a few minutes.'

But as soon as she had spoken a bell rang in the lower part of the
house. Amy had no doubt that it announced the promised visit.

She left the room, and in a minute or two returned with the medical
man. When the examination of the child was over, Reardon requested a few
words with the doctor in the room downstairs.

'I'll come back to you,' he whispered to Amy.

The two descended together, and entered the drawing-room.

'Is there any hope for the little fellow?' Reardon asked.

Yes, there was hope; a favourable turn might be expected.

'Now I wish to trouble you for a moment on my own account. I shouldn't
be surprised if you tell me that I have congestion of the lungs.'

The doctor, a suave man of fifty, had been inspecting his interlocutor
with curiosity. He now asked the necessary questions, and made an
examination.

'Have you had any lung trouble before this?' he inquired gravely.

'Slight congestion of the right lung not many weeks ago.'

'I must order you to bed immediately. Why have you allowed your symptoms
to go so far without--'

'I have just come down from London,' interrupted Reardon.

'Tut, tut, tut! To bed this moment, my dear sir! There is inflammation,
and--'

'I can't have a bed in this house; there is no spare room. I must go to
the nearest hotel.'

'Positively? Then let me take you. My carriage is at the door.'

'One thing--I beg you won't tell my wife that this is serious. Wait till
she is out of her anxiety about the child.'

'You will need the services of a nurse. A most unfortunate thing that
you are obliged to go to the hotel.'

'It can't be helped. If a nurse is necessary, I must engage one.'

He had the strange sensation of knowing that whatever was needful could
be paid for; it relieved his mind immensely. To the rich, illness has
none of the worst horrors only understood by the poor.

'Don't speak a word more than you can help,' said the doctor as he
watched Reardon withdraw.

Amy stood on the lower stairs, and came down as soon as her husband
showed himself.

'The doctor is good enough to take me in his carriage,' he whispered.
'It is better that I should go to bed, and get a good night's rest. I
wish I could have sat with you, Amy.'

'Is it anything? You look worse than when you came, Edwin.'

'A feverish cold. Don't give it a thought, dearest. Go to Willie.
Good-night!'

She threw her arms about him.

'I shall come to see you if you are not able to be here by nine in the
morning,' she said, and added the name of the hotel to which he was to
go.

At this establishment the doctor was well known. By midnight Reardon
lay in a comfortable room, a huge cataplasm fixed upon him, and other
needful arrangements made. A waiter had undertaken to visit him at
intervals through the night, and the man of medicine promised to return
as soon as possible after daybreak.

What sound was that, soft and continuous, remote, now clearer, now
confusedly murmuring? He must have slept, but now he lay in sudden
perfect consciousness, and that music fell upon his ears. Ah! of course
it was the rising tide; he was near the divine sea.

The night-light enabled him to discern the principal objects in the
room, and he let his eyes stray idly hither and thither. But this moment
of peacefulness was brought to an end by a fit of coughing, and he
became troubled, profoundly troubled, in mind. Was his illness really
dangerous? He tried to draw a deep breath, but could not. He found that
he could only lie on his right side with any ease. And with the effort
of turning he exhausted himself; in the course of an hour or two all
his strength had left him. Vague fears flitted harassingly through his
thoughts. If he had inflammation of the lungs--that was a disease of
which one might die, and speedily. Death? No, no, no; impossible at such
a time as this, when Amy, his own dear wife, had come back to him, and
had brought him that which would insure their happiness through all the
years of a long life.

He was still quite a young man; there must be great reserves of strength
in him. And he had the will to live, the prevailing will, the passionate
all-conquering desire of happiness.

How he had alarmed himself! Why, now he was calmer again, and again
could listen to the music of the breakers. Not all the folly and
baseness that paraded along this strip of the shore could change the
sea's eternal melody. In a day or two he would walk on the sands with
Amy, somewhere quite out of sight of the repulsive town. But Willie was
ill; he had forgotten that. Poor little boy! In future the child should
be more to him; though never what the mother was, his own love, won
again and for ever.

Again an interval of unconsciousness, brought to an end by that aching
in his side. He breathed very quickly; could not help doing so. He had
never felt so ill as this, never. Was it not near morning?

Then he dreamt. He was at Patras, was stepping into a boat to be rowed
out to the steamer which would bear him away from Greece. A magnificent
night, though at the end of December; a sky of deep blue, thick set with
stars. No sound but the steady splash of the oars, or perhaps a voice
from one of the many vessels that lay anchored in the harbour, each
showing its lantern-gleams. The water was as deep a blue as the sky, and
sparkled with reflected radiance.

And now he stood on deck in the light of early morning. Southward lay
the Ionian Islands; he looked for Ithaca, and grieved that it had been
passed in the hours of darkness. But the nearest point of the main shore
was a rocky promontory; it reminded him that in these waters was fought
the battle of Actium.

The glory vanished. He lay once more a sick man in a hired chamber,
longing for the dull English dawn.

At eight o'clock came the doctor. He would allow only a word or two to
be uttered, and his visit was brief. Reardon was chiefly anxious to have
news of the child, but for this he would have to wait.

At ten Amy entered the bedroom. Reardon could not raise himself, but he
stretched out his hand and took hers, and gazed eagerly at her. She must
have been weeping, he felt sure of that, and there was an expression on
her face such as he had never seen there.

'How is Willie?'

'Better, dear; much better.'

He still searched her face.

'Ought you to leave him?'

'Hush! You mustn't speak.'

Tears broke from her eyes, and Reardon had the conviction that the child
was dead.

'The truth, Amy!'

She threw herself on her knees by the bedside, and pressed her wet cheek
against his hand.

'I am come to nurse you, dear husband,' she said a moment after,
standing up again and kissing his forehead. 'I have only you now.'

His heart sank, and for a moment so great a terror was upon him that he
closed his eyes and seemed to pass into utter darkness. But those
last words of hers repeated themselves in his mind, and at length they
brought a deep solace. Poor little Willie had been the cause of the
first coldness between him and Amy; her love for him had given place to
a mother's love for the child. Now it would be as in the first days of
their marriage; they would again be all in all to each other.

'You oughtn't to have come, feeling so ill,' she said to him. 'You
should have let me know, dear.'

He smiled and kissed her hand.

'And you kept the truth from me last night, in kindness.'

She checked herself, knowing that agitation must be harmful to him. She
had hoped to conceal the child's death, but the effort was too much for
her overstrung nerves. And indeed it was only possible for her to remain
an hour or two by this sick-bed, for she was exhausted by her night
of watching, and the sudden agony with which it had concluded. Shortly
after Amy's departure, a professional nurse came to attend upon what the
doctor had privately characterised as a very grave case.

By the evening its gravity was in no respect diminished. The sufferer
had ceased to cough and to make restless movements, and had become
lethargic; later, he spoke deliriously, or rather muttered, for his
words were seldom intelligible. Amy had returned to the room at four
o'clock, and remained till far into the night; she was physically
exhausted, and could do little but sit in a chair by the bedside
and shed silent tears, or gaze at vacancy in the woe of her sudden
desolation. Telegrams had been exchanged with her mother, who was to
arrive in Brighton to-morrow morning; the child's funeral would probably
be on the third day from this.

When she rose to go away for the night, leaving the nurse in attendance,
Reardon seemed to lie in a state of unconsciousness, but just as she was
turning from the bed, he opened his eyes and pronounced her name.

'I am here, Edwin,' she answered, bending over him.

'Will you let Biffen know?' he said in low but very clear tones.

'That you are ill dear? I will write at once, or telegraph, if you like.
What is his address?'

He had closed his eyes again, and there came no reply. Amy repeated her
question twice; she was turning from him in hopelessness when his voice
became audible.

'I can't remember his new address. I know it, but I can't remember.'

She had to leave him thus.

The next day his breathing was so harassed that he had to be raised
against pillows. But throughout the hours of daylight his mind was
clear, and from time to time he whispered words of tenderness in reply
to Amy's look. He never willingly relinquished her hand, and repeatedly
he pressed it against his cheek or lips. Vainly he still endeavoured to
recall his friend's address.

'Couldn't Mr Carter discover it for you?' Amy asked.

'Perhaps. You might try.'

She would have suggested applying to Jasper Milvain, but that name must
not be mentioned. Whelpdale, also, would perchance know where Biffen
lived, but Whelpdale's address he had also forgotten.

At night there were long periods of delirium; not mere confused
muttering, but continuous talk which the listeners could follow
perfectly.

For the most part the sufferer's mind was occupied with revival of the
distress he had undergone whilst making those last efforts to write
something worthy of himself. Amy's heart was wrung as she heard him
living through that time of supreme misery--misery which she might have
done so much to alleviate, had not selfish fears and irritated pride
caused her to draw further and further from him. Hers was the kind of
penitence which is forced by sheer stress of circumstances on a nature
which resents any form of humiliation; she could not abandon herself to
unreserved grief for what she had done or omitted, and the sense of this
defect made a great part of her affliction. When her husband lay in mute
lethargy, she thought only of her dead child, and mourned the loss; but
his delirious utterances constrained her to break from that bittersweet
preoccupation, to confuse her mourning with self-reproach and with
fears.

Though unconsciously, he was addressing her: 'I can do no more, Amy. My
brain seems to be worn out; I can't compose, I can't even think. Look! I
have been sitting here for hours, and I have done only that little bit,
half a dozen lines. Such poor stuff too! I should burn it, only I can't
afford. I must do my regular quantity every day, no matter what it is.'

The nurse, who was present when he talked in this way, looked to Amy for
an explanation.

'My husband is an author,' Amy answered. 'Not long ago he was obliged to
write when he was ill and ought to have been resting.'

'I always thought it must be hard work writing books,' said the nurse
with a shake of her head.

'You don't understand me,' the voice pursued, dreadful as a voice always
is when speaking independently of the will. 'You think I am only a poor
creature, because I can do nothing better than this. If only I had money
enough to rest for a year or two, you should see. Just because I have no
money I must sink to this degradation. And I am losing you as well; you
don't love me!'

He began to moan in anguish.

But a happy change presently came over his dreaming. He fell into
animated description of his experiences in Greece and Italy, and after
talking for a long time, he turned his head and said in a perfectly
natural tone:

'Amy, do you know that Biffen and I are going to Greece?'

She believed he spoke consciously, and replied:

'You must take me with you, Edwin.'

He paid no attention to this remark, but went on with the same deceptive
accent.

'He deserves a holiday after nearly getting burnt to death to save
his novel. Imagine the old fellow plunging headlong into the flames to
rescue his manuscript! Don't say that authors can't be heroic!'

And he laughed gaily.

Another morning broke. It was possible, said the doctors (a second had
been summoned), that a crisis which drew near might bring the favourable
turn; but Amy formed her own opinion from the way in which the
nurse expressed herself. She felt sure that the gravest fears were
entertained. Before noon Reardon awoke from what had seemed natural
sleep--save for the rapid breathing--and of a sudden recollected the
number of the house in Cleveland Street at which Biffen was now living.
He uttered it without explanation. Amy at once conjectured his meaning,
and as soon as her surmise was confirmed she despatched a telegram to
her husband's friend.

That evening, as Amy was on the point of returning to the sick-room
after having dined at her friend's house, it was announced that
a gentleman named Biffen wished to see her. She found him in the
dining-room, and, even amid her distress, it was a satisfaction to her
that he presented a far more conventional appearance than in the old
days. All the garments he wore, even his hat, gloves, and boots,
were new; a surprising state of things, explained by the fact of his
commercial brother having sent him a present of ten pounds, a practical
expression of sympathy with him in his recent calamity. Biffen could
not speak; he looked with alarm at Amy's pallid face. In a few words she
told him of Reardon's condition.

'I feared this,' he replied under his breath. 'He was ill when I saw him
off at London Bridge. But Willie is better, I trust?'

Amy tried to answer, but tears filled her eyes and her head drooped.
Harold was overcome with a sense of fatality; grief and dread held him
motionless.

They conversed brokenly for a few minutes, then left the house, Biffen
carrying the hand-bag with which he had travelled hither. When they
reached the hotel he waited apart until it was ascertained whether he
could enter the sick-room. Amy rejoined him and said with a faint smile:

'He is conscious, and was very glad to hear that you had come. But don't
let him try to speak much.'

The change that had come over his friend's countenance was to Harold, of
course, far more gravely impressive than to those who had watched at the
bedside. In the drawn features, large sunken eyes, thin and discoloured
lips, it seemed to him that he read too surely the presage of doom.
After holding the shrunken hand for a moment he was convulsed with an
agonising sob, and had to turn away.

Amy saw that her husband wished to speak to her; she bent over him.

'Ask him to stay, dear. Give him a room in the hotel.'

'I will.'

Biffen sat down by the bedside, and remained for half an hour. His
friend inquired whether he had yet heard about the novel; the answer was
a shake of the head. When he rose, Reardon signed to him to bend down,
and whispered:

'It doesn't matter what happens; she is mine again.'

The next day was very cold, but a blue sky gleamed over land and sea.
The drives and promenades were thronged with people in exuberant health
and spirits. Biffen regarded this spectacle with resentful scorn; at
another time it would have moved him merely to mirth, but not even the
sound of the breakers when he had wandered as far as possible from human
contact could help him to think with resignation of the injustice which
triumphs so flagrantly in the destinies of men. Towards Amy he had no
shadow of unkindness; the sight of her in tears had impressed him as
profoundly, in another way, as that of his friend's wasted features. She
and Reardon were again one, and his love for them both was stronger than
any emotion of tenderness he had ever known.

In the afternoon he again sat by the bedside. Every symptom of the
sufferer's condition pointed to an approaching end: a face that had
grown cadaverous, livid lips, breath drawn in hurrying gasps. Harold
despaired of another look of recognition. But as he sat with his
forehead resting on his hand Amy touched him; Reardon had turned his
face in their direction, and with a conscious gaze.

'I shall never go with you to Greece,' he said distinctly.

There was silence again. Biffen did not move his eyes from the deathly
mask; in a minute or two he saw a smile soften its lineaments, and
Reardon again spoke:

'How often you and I have quoted it!--"We are such stuff as dreams are
made on, and our--"'

The remaining words were indistinguishable, and, as if the effort of
utterance had exhausted him, his eyes closed, and he sank into lethargy.

When he came down from his bedroom on the following morning, Biffen was
informed that his friend had died between two and three o'clock. At the
same time he received a note in which Amy requested him to come and see
her late in the afternoon. He spent the day in a long walk along the
eastward cliffs; again the sun shone brilliantly, and the sea was
flecked with foam upon its changing green and azure. It seemed to him
that he had never before known solitude, even through all the years of
his lonely and sad existence.

At sunset he obeyed Amy's summons. He found her calm, but with the signs
of long weeping.

'At the last moment,' she said, 'he was able to speak to me, and you
were mentioned. He wished you to have all that he has left in his room
at Islington. When I come back to London, will you take me there and let
me see the room just as when he lived in it? Let the people in the house
know what has happened, and that I am responsible for whatever will be
owing.'

Her resolve to behave composedly gave way as soon as Harold's broken
voice had replied. Hysterical sobbing made further speech from her
impossible, and Biffen, after holding her hand reverently for a moment,
left her alone.



CHAPTER XXXIII. THE SUNNY WAY

On an evening of early summer, six months after the death of Edwin
Reardon, Jasper of the facile pen was bending over his desk, writing
rapidly by the warm western light which told that sunset was near. Not
far from him sat his younger sister; she was reading, and the book in
her hand bore the title, 'Mr Bailey, Grocer.'

'How will this do?' Jasper exclaimed, suddenly throwing down his pen.

And he read aloud a critical notice of the book with which Dora was
occupied; a notice of the frankly eulogistic species, beginning with:
'It is seldom nowadays that the luckless reviewer of novels can draw
the attention of the public to a new work which is at once powerful and
