In this way the awkwardness of the situation was overcome, and when
Marian next had occasion to speak of money matters no serious objection
was offered to her proposal.

Dora Milvain of course learnt what had come to pass; to anticipate
criticism, her brother imparted to her the decision at which Marian and
he had arrived. She reflected with an air of discontent.

'So you are quite satisfied,' was her question at length, 'that Marian
should toil to support her parents as well as herself?'

'Can I help it?'

'I shall think very ill of you if you don't marry her in a year at
latest.'

'I tell you, Marian has made a deliberate choice. She understands me
perfectly, and is quite satisfied with my projects. You will have the
kindness, Dora, not to disturb her faith in me.'

'I agree to that; and in return I shall let you know when she begins to
suffer from hunger. It won't be very long till then, you may be sure.
How do you suppose three people are going to live on a hundred a year?
And it's very doubtful indeed whether Marian can earn as much as fifty
pounds. Never mind; I shall let you know when she is beginning to
starve, and doubtless that will amuse you.'

At the end of July Maud was married. Between Mr Dolomore and
Jasper existed no superfluous kindness, each resenting the other's
self-sufficiency; but Jasper, when once satisfied of his proposed
brother-in-law's straightforwardness, was careful not to give offence to
a man who might some day serve him. Provided this marriage resulted in
moderate happiness to Maud, it was undoubtedly a magnificent stroke of
luck. Mrs Lane, the lady who has so often been casually mentioned, took
upon herself those offices in connection with the ceremony which
the bride's mother is wont to perform; at her house was held the
wedding-breakfast, and such other absurdities of usage as recommend
themselves to Society. Dora of course played the part of a bridesmaid,
and Jasper went through his duties with the suave seriousness of a man
who has convinced himself that he cannot afford to despise anything that
the world sanctions.

About the same time occurred another event which was to have more
importance for this aspiring little family than could as yet be
foreseen. Whelpdale's noteworthy idea triumphed; the weekly paper called
Chat was thoroughly transformed, and appeared as Chit-Chat. From the
first number, the success of the enterprise was beyond doubt; in a
month's time all England was ringing with the fame of this noble
new development of journalism; the proprietor saw his way to a solid
fortune, and other men who had money to embark began to scheme imitative
publications. It was clear that the quarter-educated would soon be
abundantly provided with literature to their taste.

Whelpdale's exultation was unbounded, but in the fifth week of the life
of Chit-Chat something happened which threatened to overturn his sober
reason. Jasper was walking along the Strand one afternoon, when he
saw his ingenious friend approaching him in a manner scarcely to be
accounted for, unless Whelpdale's abstemiousness had for once given way
before convivial invitation. The young man's hat was on the back of his
head, and his coat flew wildly as he rushed forwards with perspiring
face and glaring eyes. He would have passed without observing Jasper,
had not the latter called to him; then he turned round, laughed
insanely, grasped his acquaintance by the wrists, and drew him aside
into a court.

'What do you think?' he panted. 'What do you think has happened?'

'Not what one would suppose, I hope. You seem to have gone mad.'

'I've got Lake's place on Chit-Chat!' cried the other hoarsely. 'Two
hundred and fifty a year! Lake and the editor quarrelled--pummelled each
other--neither know nor care what it was about. My fortune's made!'

'You're a modest man,' remarked Jasper, smiling.

'Certainly I am. I have always admitted it. But remember that there's
my connection with Fleet as well; no need to give that up. Presently I
shall be making a clear six hundred, my dear sir!

A clear six hundred, if a penny!'

'Satisfactory, so far.'

'But you must remember that I'm not a big gun, like you! Why, my dear
Milvain, a year ago I should have thought an income of two hundred a
glorious competence. I don't aim at such things as are fit for you. You
won't be content till you have thousands; of course I know that. But I'm
a humble fellow. Yet no; by Jingo, I'm not! In one way I'm not--I must
confess it.'

'In what instance are you arrogant?'

'I can't tell you--not yet; this is neither time nor place. I say,
when will you dine with me? I shall give a dinner to half a dozen of my
acquaintances somewhere or other. Poor old Biffen must come. When can
you dine?'

'Give me a week's notice, and I'll fit it in.'

That dinner came duly off. On the day that followed, Jasper and Dora
left town for their holiday; they went to the Channel Islands, and spent
more than half of the three weeks they had allowed themselves in Sark.
Passing over from Guernsey to that island, they were amused to see a
copy of Chit-Chat in the hands of an obese and well-dressed man.

'Is he one of the quarter-educated?' asked Dora, laughing.

'Not in Whelpdale's sense of the word. But, strictly speaking, no doubt
he is. The quarter-educated constitute a very large class indeed; how
large, the huge success of that paper is demonstrating. I'll write to
Whelpdale, and let him know that his benefaction has extended even to
Sark.'

This letter was written, and in a few days there came a reply.

'Why, the fellow has written to you as well!' exclaimed Jasper, taking
up a second letter; both were on the table of their sitting-room when
they came to their lodgings for lunch. 'That's his hand.'

'It looks like it.'

Dora hummed an air as she regarded the envelope, then she took it away
with her to her room upstairs.

'What had he to say?' Jasper inquired, when she came down again and
seated herself at the table.

'Oh, a friendly letter. What does he say to you?'

Dora had never looked so animated and fresh of colour since leaving
London; her brother remarked this, and was glad to think that the air of
the Channel should be doing her so much good. He read Whelpdale's letter
aloud; it was facetious, but oddly respectful.

'The reverence that fellow has for me is astonishing,' he observed with
a laugh. 'The queer thing is, it increases the better he knows me.'

Dora laughed for five minutes.

'Oh, what a splendid epigram!' she exclaimed. 'It is indeed a queer
thing, Jasper! Did you mean that to be a good joke, or was it better
still by coming out unintentionally?'

'You are in remarkable spirits, old girl. By-the-by, would you mind
letting me see that letter of yours?'

He held out his hand.

'I left it upstairs,' Dora replied carelessly.

'Rather presumptuous in him, it seems to me.'

'Oh, he writes quite as respectfully to me as he does to you,' she
returned, with a peculiar smile.

'But what business has he to write at all? It's confounded impertinence,
now I come to think of it. I shall give him a hint to remember his
position.'

Dora could not be quite sure whether he spoke seriously or not. As both
of them had begun to eat with an excellent appetite, a few moments were
allowed to pass before the girl again spoke.

'His position is as good as ours,' she said at length.

'As good as ours? The "sub." of a paltry rag like Chit-Chat, and
assistant to a literary agency!'

'He makes considerably more money than we do.'

'Money! What's money?'

Dora was again mirthful.

'Oh, of course money is nothing! We write for honour and glory. Don't
forget to insist on that when you reprove Mr Whelpdale; no doubt it will
impress him.'

Late in the evening of that day, when the brother and sister had
strolled by moonlight up to the windmill which occupies the highest
point of Sark, and as they stood looking upon the pale expanse of sea,
dotted with the gleam of light-houses near and far, Dora broke the
silence to say quietly:

'I may as well tell you that Mr Whelpdale wants to know if I will marry
him.'

'The deuce he does!' cried Jasper, with a start. 'If I didn't half
suspect something of that kind! What astounding impudence!'

'You seriously think so?'

'Well, don't you? You hardly know him, to begin with. And then--oh,
confound it!'

'Very well, I'll tell him that his impudence astonishes me.'

'You will?'

'Certainly. Of course in civil terms. But don't let this make any
difference between you and him. Just pretend to know nothing about it;
no harm is done.'

'You are speaking in earnest?'

'Quite. He has written in a very proper way, and there's no reason
whatever to disturb our friendliness with him. I have a right to give
directions in a matter like this, and you'll please to obey them.'

Before going to bed Dora wrote a letter to Mr Whelpdale, not,
indeed, accepting his offer forthwith, but conveying to him with much
gracefulness an unmistakable encouragement to persevere. This was posted
on the morrow, and its writer continued to benefit most remarkably by
the sun and breezes and rock-scrambling of Sark.

Soon after their return to London, Dora had the satisfaction of paying
the first visit to her sister at the Dolomores' house in Ovington
Square. Maud was established in the midst of luxuries, and talked with
laughing scorn of the days when she inhabited Grub Street; her literary
tastes were henceforth to serve as merely a note of distinction, an
added grace which made evident her superiority to the well-attired and
smooth-tongued people among whom she was content to shine. On the one
hand, she had contact with the world of fashionable literature, on
the other with that of fashionable ignorance. Mrs Lane's house was a
meeting-point of the two spheres.

'I shan't be there very often,' remarked Jasper, as Dora and he
discussed their sister's magnificence. 'That's all very well in its way,
but I aim at something higher.'

'So do I,' Dora replied.

'I'm very glad to hear that. I confess it seemed to me that you were
rather too cordial with Whelpdale yesterday.'

'One must behave civilly. Mr Whelpdale quite understands me.'

'You are sure of that? He didn't seem quite so gloomy as he ought to
have been.'

'The success of Chit-Chat keeps him in good spirits.'

It was perhaps a week after this that Mrs Dolomore came quite
unexpectedly to the house by Regent's Park, as early as eleven o'clock
in the morning. She had a long talk in private with Dora. Jasper was not
at home; when he returned towards evening, Dora came to his room with a
countenance which disconcerted him.

'Is it true,' she asked abruptly, standing before him with her hands
strained together, 'that you have been representing yourself as no
longer engaged to Marian?'

'Who has told you so?'

'That doesn't matter. I have heard it, and I want to know from you that
it is false.'

Jasper thrust his hands into his pockets and walked apart.

'I can take no notice,' he said with indifference, 'of anonymous
gossip.'

'Well, then, I will tell you how I have heard. Maud came this morning,
and told me that Mrs Betterton had been asking her about it. Mrs
Betterton had heard from Mrs Lane.'

'From Mrs Lane? And from whom did she hear, pray?'

'That I don't know. Is it true or not?'

'I have never told anyone that my engagement was at an end,' replied
Jasper, deliberately.

The girl met his eyes.

'Then I was right,' she said. 'Of course I told Maud that it was
impossible to believe this for a moment. But how has it come to be
said?'

'You might as well ask me how any lie gets into circulation among people
of that sort. I have told you the truth, and there's an end of it.'

Dora lingered for a while, but left the room without saying anything
more.

She sat up late, mostly engaged in thinking, though at times an open
book was in her hand. It was nearly half-past twelve when a very light
rap at the door caused her to start. She called, and Jasper came in.

'Why are you still up?' he asked, avoiding her look as he moved forward
and took a leaning attitude behind an easy-chair.

'Oh, I don't know. Do you want anything?'

There was a pause; then Jasper said in an unsteady voice:

'I am not given to lying, Dora, and I feel confoundedly uncomfortable
about what I said to you early this evening. I didn't lie in the
ordinary sense; it's true enough that I have never told anyone that
my engagement was at an end. But I have acted as if it were, and it's
better I should tell you.'

His sister gazed at him with indignation.

'You have acted as if you were free?'

'Yes. I have proposed to Miss Rupert. How Mrs Lane and that lot have
come to know anything about this I don't understand. I am not aware of
any connecting link between them and the Ruperts, or the Barlows either.
Perhaps there are none; most likely the rumour has no foundation in
their knowledge. Still, it is better that I should have told you. Miss
Rupert has never heard that I was engaged, nor have her friends the
Barlows--at least I don't see how they could have done. She may have
told Mrs Barlow of my proposal--probably would; and this may somehow
have got round to those other people. But Maud didn't make any mention
of Miss Rupert, did she?'

Dora replied with a cold negative.

'Well, there's the state of things. It isn't pleasant, but that's what I
have done.'

'Do you mean that Miss Rupert has accepted you?'

'No. I wrote to her. She answered that she was going to Germany for a
few weeks, and that I should have her reply whilst she was away. I am
waiting.'

'But what name is to be given to behaviour such as this?'

'Listen: didn't you know perfectly well that this must be the end of
it?'

'Do you suppose I thought you utterly shameless and cruel beyond words?'

'I suppose I am both. It was a moment of desperate temptation, though.
I had dined at the Ruperts'--you remember--and it seemed to me there was
no mistaking the girl's manner.'

'Don't call her a girl!' broke in Dora, scornfully. 'You say she is
several years older than yourself.'

'Well, at all events, she's intellectual, and very rich. I yielded to
the temptation.'

'And deserted Marian just when she has most need of help and
consolation? It's frightful!'

Jasper moved to another chair and sat down. He was much perturbed.

'Look here, Dora, I regret it; I do, indeed. And, what's more, if that
woman refuses me--as it's more than likely she will--I will go to Marian
and ask her to marry me at once. I promise that.'

His sister made a movement of contemptuous impatience.

'And if the woman doesn't refuse you?'

'Then I can't help it. But there's one thing more I will say. Whether I
marry Marian or Miss Rupert, I sacrifice my strongest feelings--in the
one case to a sense of duty, in the other to worldly advantage. I was
an idiot to write that letter, for I knew at the time that there was a
woman who is far more to me than Miss Rupert and all her money--a woman
I might, perhaps, marry. Don't ask any questions; I shall not answer
them. As I have said so much, I wished you to understand my position
fully. You know the promise I have made. Don't say anything to Marian;
if I am left free I shall marry her as soon as possible.'

And so he left the room.

For a fortnight and more he remained in uncertainty. His life was very
uncomfortable, for Dora would only speak to him when necessity compelled
her; and there were two meetings with Marian, at which he had to act
his part as well as he could. At length came the expected letter. Very
nicely expressed, very friendly, very complimentary, but--a refusal.

He handed it to Dora across the breakfast-table, saying with a pinched
smile:

'Now you can look cheerful again. I am doomed.'



CHAPTER XXXV. FEVER AND REST

Milvain's skilful efforts notwithstanding, 'Mr Bailey, Grocer,' had no
success. By two publishers the book had been declined; the firm which
brought it out offered the author half profits and fifteen pounds on
account, greatly to Harold Biffen's satisfaction. But reviewers in
general were either angry or coldly contemptuous. 'Let Mr Biffen bear in
mind,' said one of these sages, 'that a novelist's first duty is to tell
a story.' 'Mr Biffen,' wrote another, 'seems not to understand that
a work of art must before everything else afford amusement.' 'A
pretentious book of the genre ennuyant,' was the brief comment of a
Society journal. A weekly of high standing began its short notice in a
rage: 'Here is another of those intolerable productions for which we
are indebted to the spirit of grovelling realism. This author, let it be
said, is never offensive, but then one must go on to describe his work
by a succession of negatives; it is never interesting, never profitable,
never--' and the rest. The eulogy in The West End had a few timid
echoes. That in The Current would have secured more imitators, but
unfortunately it appeared when most of the reviewing had already
been done. And, as Jasper truly said, only a concurrence of powerful
testimonials could have compelled any number of people to affect an
interest in this book. 'The first duty of a novelist is to tell a
story:' the perpetual repetition of this phrase is a warning to all
men who propose drawing from the life. Biffen only offered a slice of
biography, and it was found to lack flavour.

He wrote to Mrs Reardon: 'I cannot thank you enough for this very kind
letter about my book; I value it more than I should the praises of all
the reviewers in existence. You have understood my aim. Few people
will do that, and very few indeed could express it with such clear
conciseness.'

If Amy had but contented herself with a civil acknowledgment of the
volumes he sent her! She thought it a kindness to write to him so
appreciatively, to exaggerate her approval. The poor fellow was so
lonely. Yes, but his loneliness only became intolerable when a beautiful
woman had smiled upon him, and so forced him to dream perpetually of
that supreme joy of life which to him was forbidden.

It was a fatal day, that on which Amy put herself under his guidance
to visit Reardon's poor room at Islington. In the old times, Harold had
been wont to regard his friend's wife as the perfect woman; seldom in
his life had he enjoyed female society, and when he first met Amy it
was years since he had spoken with any woman above the rank of a
lodging-house keeper or a needle-plier. Her beauty seemed to him of a
very high order, and her mental endowments filled him with an exquisite
delight, not to be appreciated by men who have never been in his
position. When the rupture came between Amy and her husband, Harold
could not believe that she was in any way to blame; held to Reardon by
strong friendship, he yet accused him of injustice to Amy. And what
he saw of her at Brighton confirmed him in this judgment. When he
accompanied her to Manville Street, he allowed her, of course, to remain
alone in the room where Reardon had lived; but Amy presently summoned
him, and asked him questions. Every tear she shed watered a growth of
passionate tenderness in the solitary man's heart. Parting from her at
length, he went to hide his face in darkness and think of her--think of
her.

A fatal day. There was an end of all his peace, all his capacity
for labour, his patient endurance of penury. Once, when he was about
three-and-twenty, he had been in love with a girl of gentle nature and
fair intelligence; on account of his poverty, he could not even hope
that his love might be returned, and he went away to bear the misery as
best he might. Since then the life he had led precluded the forming of
such attachments; it would never have been possible for him to support
a wife of however humble origin. At intervals he felt the full weight
of his loneliness, but there were happily long periods during which his
Greek studies and his efforts in realistic fiction made him indifferent
to the curse laid upon him. But after that hour of intimate speech with
Amy, he never again knew rest of mind or heart.

Accepting what Reardon had bequeathed to him, he removed the books and
furniture to a room in that part of the town which he had found most
convenient for his singular tutorial pursuits. The winter did not pass
without days of all but starvation, but in March he received his fifteen
pounds for 'Mr Bailey,' and this was a fortune, putting him beyond the
reach of hunger for full six months. Not long after that he yielded to
a temptation that haunted him day and night, and went to call upon Amy,
who was still living with her mother at Westbourne Park. When he
entered the drawing-room Amy was sitting there alone; she rose with an
exclamation of frank pleasure.

'I have often thought of you lately, Mr Biffen. How kind to come and see
me!'

He could scarcely speak; her beauty, as she stood before him in the
graceful black dress, was anguish to his excited nerves, and her voice
was so cruel in its conventional warmth. When he looked at her eyes,
he remembered how their brightness had been dimmed with tears, and the
sorrow he had shared with her seemed to make him more than an ordinary
friend. When he told her of his success with the publishers, she was
delighted.

'Oh, when is it to come out? I shall watch the advertisements so
anxiously.'

'Will you allow me to send you a copy, Mrs Reardon?'

'Can you really spare one?'

Of the half-dozen he would receive, he scarcely knew how to dispose of
three. And Amy expressed her gratitude in the most charming way. She had
gained much in point of manner during the past twelve months; her ten
thousand pounds inspired her with the confidence necessary to a perfect
demeanour. That slight hardness which was wont to be perceptible in
her tone had altogether passed away; she seemed to be cultivating
flexibility of voice.

Mrs Yule came in, and was all graciousness. Then two callers presented
themselves. Biffen's pleasure was at an end as soon as he had to adapt
himself to polite dialogue; he escaped as speedily as possible.

He was not the kind of man that deceives himself as to his own aspect
in the eyes of others. Be as kind as she might, Amy could not set him
strutting Malvolio-wise; she viewed him as a poor devil who often had
to pawn his coat--a man of parts who would never get on in the world--a
friend to be thought of kindly because her dead husband had valued
him. Nothing more than that; he understood perfectly the limits of her
feeling. But this could not put restraint upon the emotion with which
he received any most trifling utterance of kindness from her. He did not
think of what was, but of what, under changed circumstances, might be.
To encourage such fantasy was the idlest self-torment, but he had gone
too far in this form of indulgence. He became the slave of his inflamed
imagination.

In that letter with which he replied to her praises of his book,
perchance he had allowed himself to speak too much as he thought.

He wrote in reckless delight, and did not wait for the prudence of a
later hour. When it was past recall, he would gladly have softened
many of the expressions the letter contained. 'I value it more than the
praises of all the reviewers in existence'--would Amy be offended at
that? 'Yours in gratitude and reverence,' he had signed himself--the
kind of phrase that comes naturally to a passionate man, when he would
fain say more than he dares. To what purpose this half-revelation?
Unless, indeed, he wished to learn once and for ever, by the gentlest
of repulses, that his homage was only welcome so long as it kept well
within conventional terms.

He passed a month of distracted idleness, until there came a day
when the need to see Amy was so imperative that it mastered every
consideration. He donned his best clothes, and about four o'clock
presented himself at Mrs Yule's house. By ill luck there happened to be
at least half a dozen callers in the drawing-room; the strappado would
have been preferable, in his eyes, to such an ordeal as this. Moreover,
he was convinced that both Amy and her mother received him with far less
cordiality than on the last occasion. He had expected it, but he bit
his lips till the blood came. What business had he among people of this
kind? No doubt the visitors wondered at his comparative shabbiness, and
asked themselves how he ventured to make a call without the regulation
chimney-pot hat. It was a wretched and foolish mistake.

Ten minutes saw him in the street again, vowing that he would never
approach Amy more. Not that he found fault with her; the blame was
entirely his own.

He lived on the third floor of a house in Goodge Street, above a baker's
shop. The bequest of Reardon's furniture was a great advantage to him,
as he had only to pay rent for a bare room; the books, too, came as a
godsend, since the destruction of his own. He had now only one pupil,
and was not exerting himself to find others; his old energy had forsaken
him.

For the failure of his book he cared nothing. It was no more than he
anticipated. The work was done--the best he was capable of--and this
satisfied him.

It was doubtful whether he loved Amy, in the true sense of exclusive
desire. She represented for him all that is lovely in womanhood; to his
starved soul and senses she was woman, the complement of his frustrate
being. Circumstance had made her the means of exciting in him that
natural force which had hitherto either been dormant or had yielded to
the resolute will.

Companionless, inert, he suffered the tortures which are so ludicrous
and contemptible to the happily married. Life was barren to him, and
would soon grow hateful; only in sleep could he cast off the unchanging
thoughts and desires which made all else meaningless. And rightly
meaningless: he revolted against the unnatural constraints forbidding
him to complete his manhood.

By what fatality was he alone of men withheld from the winning of a
woman's love?

He could not bear to walk the streets where the faces of beautiful women
would encounter him. When he must needs leave the house, he went about
in the poor, narrow ways, where only spectacles of coarseness, and
want, and toil would be presented to him. Yet even here he was too often
reminded that the poverty-stricken of the class to which poverty is
natural were not condemned to endure in solitude. Only he who belonged
to no class, who was rejected alike by his fellows in privation and by
his equals in intellect, must die without having known the touch of a
loving woman's hand.

The summer went by, and he was unconscious of its warmth and light. How
his days passed he could not have said.

One evening in early autumn, as he stood before the book-stall at the
end of Goodge Street, a familiar voice accosted him. It was Whelpdale's.
A month or two ago he had stubbornly refused an invitation to dine
with Whelpdale and other acquaintances--you remember what the occasion
was--and since then the prosperous young man had not crossed his path.

'I've something to tell you,' said the assailer, taking hold of his
arm. 'I'm in a tremendous state of mind, and want someone to share my
delight. You can walk a short way, I hope? Not too busy with some new
book?'

Biffen gave no answer, but went whither he was led.

'You are writing a new book, I suppose? Don't be discouraged, old
fellow. "Mr Bailey" will have his day yet; I know men who consider it an
undoubted work of genius. What's the next to deal with?'

'I haven't decided yet,' replied Harold, merely to avoid argument. He
spoke so seldom that the sound of his own voice was strange to him.

'Thinking over it, I suppose, in your usual solid way. Don't be hurried.
But I must tell you of this affair of mine. You know Dora Milvain? I
have asked her to marry me, and, by the Powers! she has given me an
encouraging answer. Not an actual yes, but encouraging! She's away in
the Channel Islands, and I wrote--'

He talked on for a quarter of an hour. Then, with a sudden movement, the
listener freed himself.

'I can't go any farther,' he said hoarsely. 'Good-bye!'

Whelpdale was disconcerted.

'I have been boring you. That's a confounded fault of mine; I know it.'

Biffen had waved his hand, and was gone.

A week or two more would see him at the end of his money. He had no
lessons now, and could not write; from his novel nothing was to be
expected. He might apply again to his brother, but such dependence was
unjust and unworthy. And why should he struggle to preserve a life which
had no prospect but of misery?

It was in the hours following his encounter with Whelpdale that he first
knew the actual desire of death, the simple longing for extinction. One
must go far in suffering before the innate will-to-live is thus truly
overcome; weariness of bodily anguish may induce this perversion of
the instincts; less often, that despair of suppressed emotion which
had fallen upon Harold. Through the night he kept his thoughts fixed on
death in its aspect of repose, of eternal oblivion. And herein he had
found solace.

The next night it was the same. Moving about among common needs and
occupations, he knew not a moment's cessation of heart-ache, but when
he lay down in the darkness a hopeful summons whispered to him. Night,
which had been the worst season of his pain, had now grown friendly; it
came as an anticipation of the sleep that is everlasting.

A few more days, and he was possessed by a calm of spirit such as he had
never known. His resolve was taken, not in a moment of supreme conflict,
but as the result of a subtle process by which his imagination had
become in love with death. Turning from contemplation of life's one
rapture, he looked with the same intensity of desire to a state that had
neither fear nor hope.

One afternoon he went to the Museum Reading-room, and was busy for a few
minutes in consultation of a volume which he took from the shelves
of medical literature. On his way homeward he entered two or three
chemists' shops. Something of which he had need could be procured only
in very small quantities; but repetition of his demand in different
places supplied him sufficiently. When he reached his room, he emptied
the contents of sundry little bottles into one larger, and put this in
his pocket. Then he wrote rather a long letter, addressed to his brother
at Liverpool.

It had been a beautiful day, and there wanted still a couple of hours
before the warm, golden sunlight would disappear. Harold stood and
looked round his room. As always, it presented a neat, orderly aspect,
but his eye caught sight of a volume which stood upside down, and this
fault--particularly hateful to a bookish man--he rectified. He put
his blotting-pad square on the table, closed the lid of the inkstand,
arranged his pens. Then he took his hat and stick, locked the door
behind him, and went downstairs. At the foot he spoke to his landlady,
and told her that he should not return that night. As soon as possible
after leaving the house he posted his letter.

His direction was westward; walking at a steady, purposeful pace, with
cheery countenance and eyes that gave sign of pleasure as often as they
turned to the sun-smitten clouds, he struck across Kensington Gardens,
and then on towards Fulham, where he crossed the Thames to Putney. The
sun was just setting; he paused a few moments on the bridge, watching
the river with a quiet smile, and enjoying the splendour of the sky.
Up Putney Hill he walked slowly; when he reached the top it was growing
dark, but an unwonted effect in the atmosphere caused him to turn and
look to the east. An exclamation escaped his lips, for there before him
was the new-risen moon, a perfect globe, vast and red. He gazed at it
for a long time.

When the daylight had entirely passed, he went forward on to the heath,
and rambled, as if idly, to a secluded part, where trees and bushes made
a deep shadow under the full moon. It was still quite warm, and scarcely
a breath of air moved among the reddening leaves.

Sure at length that he was remote from all observation, he pressed into
a little copse, and there reclined on the grass, leaning against the
stem of a tree. The moon was now hidden from him, but by looking upward
he could see its light upon a long, faint cloud, and the blue of the
placid sky. His mood was one of ineffable peace. Only thoughts of
beautiful things came into his mind; he had reverted to an earlier
period of life, when as yet no mission of literary realism had been
imposed upon him, and when his passions were still soothed by natural
hope. The memory of his friend Reardon was strongly present with him,
but of Amy he thought only as of that star which had just come into his
vision above the edge of dark foliage--beautiful, but infinitely remote.

Recalling Reardon's voice, it brought to him those last words whispered
by his dying companion. He remembered them now:

We are such stuff As dreams are made on, and our little life Is rounded
with a sleep.



CHAPTER XXXVI. JASPER'S DELICATE CASE

Only when he received Miss Rupert's amiably-worded refusal to become his
wife was Jasper aware how firmly he had counted on her accepting him. He
told Dora with sincerity that his proposal was a piece of foolishness;
so far from having any regard for Miss Rupert, he felt towards her with
something of antipathy, and at the same time he was conscious of ardent
emotions, if not love, for another woman who would be no bad match even
from the commercial point of view. Yet so strong was the effect upon him
of contemplating a large fortune, that, in despite of reason and desire,
he lived in eager expectation of the word which should make him rich.
And for several hours after his disappointment he could not overcome the
impression of calamity.

A part of that impression was due to the engagement which he must now
fulfil. He had pledged his word to ask Marian to marry him without
further delay. To shuffle out of this duty would make him too ignoble
even in his own eyes. Its discharge meant, as he had expressed it, that
he was 'doomed'; he would deliberately be committing the very error
always so flagrant to him in the case of other men who had crippled
themselves by early marriage with a penniless woman. But events had
enmeshed him; circumstances had proved fatal. Because, in his salad
days, he dallied with a girl who had indeed many charms, step by step
he had come to the necessity of sacrificing his prospects to that raw
attachment. And, to make it more irritating, this happened just when the
way began to be much clearer before him.

Unable to think of work, he left the house and wandered gloomily about
Regent's Park. For the first time in his recollection the confidence
which was wont to inspirit him gave way to an attack of sullen
discontent. He felt himself ill-used by destiny, and therefore by
Marian, who was fate's instrument. It was not in his nature that this
mood should last long, but it revealed to him those darker possibilities
which his egoism would develop if it came seriously into conflict with
overmastering misfortune. A hope, a craven hope, insinuated itself into
the cracks of his infirm resolve. He would not examine it, but conscious
of its existence he was able to go home in somewhat better spirits.

He wrote to Marian. If possible she was to meet him at half-past
nine next morning at Gloucester Gate. He had reasons for wishing this
interview to take place on neutral ground.

Early in the afternoon, when he was trying to do some work, there
arrived a letter which he opened with impatient hand; the writing was
Mrs Reardon's, and he could not guess what she had to communicate.

'DEAR MR MILVAIN,--I am distressed beyond measure to read in this
morning's newspaper that poor Mr Biffen has put an end to his life.
Doubtless you can obtain more details than are given in this bare report
of the discovery of his body. Will you let me hear, or come and see me?'

He read and was astonished. Absorbed in his own affairs, he had not
opened the newspaper to-day; it lay folded on a chair. Hastily he ran
his eye over the columns, and found at length a short paragraph which
stated that the body of a man who had evidently committed suicide by
taking poison had been found on Putney Heath; that papers in his pockets
identified him as one Harold Biffen, lately resident in Goodge Street,
Tottenham Court Road; and that an inquest would be held, &c. He went
to Dora's room, and told her of the event, but without mentioning the
letter which had brought it under his notice.

'I suppose there was no alternative between that and starvation. I
scarcely thought of Biffen as likely to kill himself. If Reardon had
done it, I shouldn't have felt the least surprise.'

'Mr Whelpdale will be bringing us information, no doubt,' said Dora,
who, as she spoke, thought more of that gentleman's visit than of the
event that was to occasion it.

'Really, one can't grieve. There seemed no possibility of his ever
earning enough to live decently upon. But why the deuce did he go all
the way out there? Consideration for the people in whose house he lived,
I dare say; Biffen had a good deal of native delicacy.'

Dora felt a secret wish that someone else possessed more of that
desirable quality.

Leaving her, Jasper made a rapid, though careful, toilet, and was
presently on his way to Westbourne Park. It was his hope that he should
reach Mrs Yule's house before any ordinary afternoon caller could
arrive; and so he did. He had not been here since that evening when he
encountered Reardon on the road and heard his reproaches. To his great
satisfaction, Amy was alone in the drawing-room; he held her hand a
trifle longer than was necessary, and returned more earnestly the look
of interest with which she regarded him.

'I was ignorant of this affair when your letter came,' he began, 'and I
set out immediately to see you.'

'I hoped you would bring me some news. What can have driven the poor man
to such extremity?'

'Poverty, I can only suppose. But I will see Whelpdale. I hadn't come
across Biffen for a long time.'

'Was he still so very poor?' asked Amy, compassionately.

'I'm afraid so. His book failed utterly.'

'Oh, if I had imagined him still in such distress, surely I might have
done something to help him!'--So often the regretful remark of one's
friends, when one has been permitted to perish.

With Amy's sorrow was mingled a suggestion of tenderness which came of
her knowledge that the dead man had worshipped her. Perchance his death
was in part attributable to that hopeless love.

'He sent me a copy of his novel,' she said, 'and I saw him once or twice
after that. But he was much better dressed than in former days, and I
thought--'

Having this subject to converse upon put the two more quickly at ease
than could otherwise have been the case. Jasper was closely observant
of the young widow; her finished graces made a strong appeal to his
admiration, and even in some degree awed him. He saw that her beauty had
matured, and it was more distinctly than ever of the type to which he
paid reverence. Amy might take a foremost place among brilliant women.
At a dinner-table, in grand toilet, she would be superb; at polite
receptions people would whisper: 'Who is that?'

Biffen fell out of the dialogue.

'It grieved me very much,' said Amy, 'to hear of the misfortune that
befell my cousin.'

'The legacy affair? Why, yes, it was a pity. Especially now that her
father is threatened with blindness.'

'Is it so serious? I heard indirectly that he had something the matter
with his eyes, but I didn't know--'

'They may be able to operate before long, and perhaps it will be
successful. But in the meantime Marian has to do his work.'

'This explains the--the delay?' fell from Amy's lips, as she smiled.

Jasper moved uncomfortably. It was a voluntary gesture.

'The whole situation explains it,' he replied, with some show of
impulsiveness. 'I am very much afraid Marian is tied during her father's
life.'

'Indeed? But there is her mother.'

'No companion for her father, as I think you know. Even if Mr Yule
recovers his sight, it is not at all likely that he will be able to work
as before. Our difficulties are so grave that--'

He paused, and let his hand fail despondently.

'I hope it isn't affecting your work--your progress?'

'To some extent, necessarily. I have a good deal of will, you remember,
and what I have set my mind upon, no doubt, I shall some day achieve.
But--one makes mistakes.'

There was silence.

'The last three years,' he continued, 'have made no slight difference
in my position. Recall where I stood when you first knew me. I have done
something since then, I think, and by my own steady effort.'

'Indeed, you have.'

'Just now I am in need of a little encouragement. You don't notice any
falling off in my work recently?'

'No, indeed.'

'Do you see my things in The Current and so on, generally?'

'I don't think I miss many of your articles. Sometimes I believe I have
detected you when there was no signature.'

'And Dora has been doing well. Her story in that girls' paper has
attracted attention. It's a great deal to have my mind at rest about
both the girls. But I can't pretend to be in very good spirits.' He
rose. 'Well, I must try to find out something more about poor Biffen.'

'Oh, you are not going yet, Mr Milvain?'

'Not, assuredly, because I wish to. But I have work to do.' He stepped
aside, but came back as if on an impulse. 'May I ask you for your advice
in a very delicate matter?'

Amy was a little disturbed, but she collected herself and smiled in a
way that reminded Jasper of his walk with her along Gower Street.

'Let me hear what it is.'

He sat down again, and bent forward.

'If Marian insists that it is her duty to remain with her father, am I
justified or not in freely consenting to that?'

'I scarcely understand. Has Marian expressed a wish to devote herself in
that way?'

'Not distinctly. But I suspect that her conscience points to it. I am in
serious doubt. On the one hand,' he explained in a tone of candour, 'who
will not blame me if our engagement terminates in circumstances such as
these? On the other--you are aware, by-the-by, that her father objects
in the strongest way to this marriage?'

'No, I didn't know that.'

'He will neither see me nor hear of me. Merely because of my connection
with Fadge. Think of that poor girl thus situated. And I could so easily
put her at rest by renouncing all claim upon her.'

'I surmise that--that you yourself would also be put at rest by such a
decision?'

'Don't look at me with that ironical smile,' he pleaded. 'What you have
said is true. And really, why should I not be glad of it? I couldn't go
about declaring that I was heartbroken, in any event; I must be content
for people to judge me according to their disposition, and judgments are
pretty sure to be unfavourable. What can I do? In either case I must to
a certain extent be in the wrong. To tell the truth, I was wrong from
the first.'

There was a slight movement about Amy's lips as these words were
uttered: she kept her eyes down, and waited before replying.

'The case is too delicate, I fear, for my advice.'

'Yes, I feel it; and perhaps I oughtn't to have spoken of it at all.
Well, I'll go back to my scribbling. I am so very glad to have seen you
again.'

'It was good of you to take the trouble to come--whilst you have so much
on your mind.'

Again Jasper held the white, soft hand for a superfluous moment.

The next morning it was he who had to wait at the rendezvous; he was
pacing the pathway at least ten minutes before the appointed time.
When Marian joined him, she was panting from a hurried walk, and this
affected Jasper disagreeably; he thought of Amy Reardon's air of repose,
and how impossible it would be for that refined person to fall into such
disorder. He observed, too, with more disgust than usual, the signs in
Marian's attire of encroaching poverty--her unsatisfactory gloves, her
mantle out of fashion. Yet for such feelings he reproached himself, and
the reproach made him angry.

They walked together in the same direction as when they met here before.
Marian could not mistake the air of restless trouble on her companion's
smooth countenance. She had divined that there was some grave reason
for this summons, and the panting with which she had approached was half
caused by the anxious beats of her heart. Jasper's long silence again
was ominous. He began abruptly:

'You've heard that Harold Biffen has committed suicide?'

'No!' she replied, looking shocked.

'Poisoned himself. You'll find something about it in today's Telegraph.'

He gave her such details as he had obtained, then added:

'There are two of my companions fallen in the battle. I ought to think
myself a lucky fellow, Marian. What?'

'You are better fitted to fight your way, Jasper.'

'More of a brute, you mean.'

'You know very well I don't. You have more energy and more intellect.'

'Well, it remains to be seen how I shall come out when I am weighted
with graver cares than I have yet known.'

She looked at him inquiringly, but said nothing.

'I have made up my mind about our affairs,' he went on presently.
'Marian, if ever we are to be married, it must be now.'

The words were so unexpected that they brought a flush to her cheeks and
neck.

'Now?'

'Yes. Will you marry me, and let us take our chance?'

Her heart throbbed violently.

'You don't mean at once, Jasper? You would wait until I know what
father's fate is to be?'

'Well, now, there's the point. You feel yourself indispensable to your
father at present?'

'Not indispensable, but--wouldn't it seem very unkind? I should be so
afraid of the effect upon his health, Jasper. So much depends, we are
told, upon his general state of mind and body. It would be dreadful if I
were the cause of--'

