CHAPTER I

A THRALL OF THRALLS

In the troubled twilight of a March evening ten years ago, an old man,
whose equipment and bearing suggested that he was fresh from travel,
walked slowly across Clerkenwell Green, and by the graveyard of St.
James's Church stood for a moment looking about him. His age could not
be far from seventy, but, despite the stoop of his shoulders, he gave
little sign of failing under the burden of years; his sober step
indicated gravity of character rather than bodily feebleness, and his
grasp of a stout stick was not such as bespeaks need of support. His
attire was neither that of a man of leisure, nor of the kind usually
worn by English mechanics. Instead of coat and waistcoat, he wore a
garment something like a fisherman's guernsey, and over this a coarse
short cloak, picturesque in appearance as it was buffeted by the wind.
His trousers were of moleskin; his boots reached almost to his knees;
for head-covering he had the cheapest kind of undyed felt, its form
exactly that of the old petasus. To say that his aspect was Venerable
would serve to present him in a measure, yet would not be wholly
accurate, for there was too much of past struggle and present anxiety
in his countenance to permit full expression of the natural dignity of
the features. It was a fine face and might have been distinctly noble,
but circumstances had marred the purpose of Nature; you perceived that
his cares had too often been of the kind which are created by ignoble
necessities, such as leave to most men of his standing a bare humanity
of visage. He had long thin white hair; his beard was short and merely
grizzled. In his left hand he carried a bundle, which probably
contained clothing.

The burial-ground by which he had paused was as little restful to the
eye as are most of those discoverable in the byways of London. The
small trees that grew about it shivered in their leaflessness; the rank
grass was wan under the failing day; most of the stones leaned this way
or that, emblems of neglect (they were very white at the top, and
darkened downwards till the damp soil made them black), and certain
cats and dogs were prowling or sporting among the graves. At this
corner the east wind blew with malice such as it never puts forth save
where there are poorly clad people to be pierced; it swept before it
thin clouds of unsavoury dust, mingled with the light refuse of the
streets. Above the shapeless houses night was signalling a murky
approach; the sky--if sky it could be called--gave threatening of
sleet, perchance of snow. And on every side was the rumble of traffic,
the voiceful evidence of toil and of poverty; hawkers were crying their
goods; the inevitable organ was clanging before a public-house hard by;
the crumpet-man was hastening along, with monotonous ringing of his
bell and hoarse rhythmic wail.

The old man had fixed his eyes half absently on the inscription of a
gravestone near him; a lean cat springing out between the iron railings
seemed to recall his attention, and with a slight sigh he went forward
along the narrow street which is called St. James's Walk. In a few
minutes he had reached the end of it, and found himself facing a high
grey-brick wall, wherein, at this point, was an arched gateway closed
with black doors. He looked at the gateway, then fixed his gaze on
something that stood just above--something which the dusk half
concealed, and by so doing made more impressive. It was the sculptured
counterfeit of a human face, that of a man distraught with agony. The
eyes stared wildly from their sockets, the hair struggled in maniac
disorder, the forehead was wrung with torture, the cheeks sunken, the
throat fearsomely wasted, and from the wide lips there seemed to be
issuing a horrible cry. Above this hideous effigy was carved the
legend: 'MIDDLESEX HOUSE OF DETENTION.'

Something more than pain came to the old man's face as he looked and
pondered; his lips trembled like those of one in anger, and his eyes
had a stern resentful gleaming. He walked on a few paces, then suddenly
stopped where a woman was standing at an open door.

'I ask your pardon,' he said, addressing her with the courtesy which
owes nothing to refined intercourse, 'but do you by chance know anyone
of the name of Snowdon hereabouts?'

The woman replied with a brief negative; she smiled at the appearance
of the questioner, and, with the vulgar instinct, looked about for
someone to share her amusement.

'Better inquire at the 'ouse at the corner,' she added, as the man was
moving away. 'They've been here a long time, I b'lieve.'

He accepted her advice. But the people at the public-house could not
aid his search. He thanked them, paused for a moment with his eyes
down, then again sighed slightly and went forth into the gathering
gloom.

Less than five minutes later there ran into the same house of
refreshment a little slight girl, perhaps thirteen years old; she
carried a jug, and at the bar asked for 'a pint of old six.' The
barman, whilst drawing the ale, called out to a man who had entered
immediately after the child:

'Don't know nobody called Snowdon about 'ere, do you, Mr. Squibbs?'

The individual addressed was very dirty, very sleepy, and seemingly at
odds with mankind. He replied contemptuously with a word which, in
phonetic rendering may perhaps be spelt 'Nay-oo.'

But the little girl was looking eagerly from one man to the other; what
had been said appeared to excite keen interest in her. She forgot all
about the beer-jug that was waiting, and, after a brief but obvious
struggle with timidity, said in an uncertain voice:

'Has somebody been asking for that name, sir?'

'Yes, they have,' the barman answered, in surprise. 'Why?'

My name's Snowdon, sir--Jane Snowdon.'

She reddened over all her face as soon as she had given utterance to
the impulsive words. The barman was regarding her with a sort of
semi-interest, and Mr. Squibbs also had fixed his bleary (or beery)
eyes upon her. Neither would have admitted an active interest in so
pale and thin and wretchedly-clad a little mortal. Her hair hung loose,
and had no covering; it was hair of no particular colour, and seemed to
have been for a long time utterly untended; the wind, on her run
hither, had tossed it into much disorder. Signs there were of some kind
of clothing beneath the short, dirty, worn dress, but it was evidently
of the scantiest description. The freely exposed neck was very thin,
but, like the outline of her face, spoke less of a feeble habit of body
than of the present pinch of sheer hunger. She did not, indeed, look
like one of those children who are born in disease and starvation, and
put to nurse upon the pavement; her limbs were shapely enough, her back
was straight, she had features that were not merely human, but
girl-like, and her look had in it the light of an intelligence
generally sought for in vain among the children of the street. The
blush and the way in which she hung her head were likewise tokens of a
nature endowed with ample sensitiveness.

'Oh, your name's Jane Snowdon, is it?' said the barman. 'Well, you're
just three minutes an' three-quarters too late. P'r'aps it's a fortune
a-runnin' after you. He was a rum old party as inquired. Never mind;
it's all in a life. There's fortunes lost every week by a good deal
less than three minutes when it's 'orses--eh, Mr. Squibbs?'

Mr. Squibbs swore with emphasis.

The little girl took her jug of beer and was turning away.

'Hollo!' cried the barman. 'Where's the money, Jane?--if _you_ don't
mind.'

She turned again in increased confusion, and laid coppers on the
counter. Thereupon the man asked her where she lived; she named a house
in Clerkenwell Close, near at hand.

'Father live there?'

She shook her head.

'Mother?'

'I haven't got one, sir.'

'Who is it as you live with, then?'

'Mrs. Peckover, sir.'

'Well, as I was sayin', he was a queer old joker as arsted for the name
of Snowdon. Shouldn't wonder if you see him goin' round.'

And he added a pretty full description of this old man, to which the
girl listened closely. Then she went thoughtfully--a little sadly--on
her way.

In the street, all but dark by this time, she cast anxious glances
onwards and behind, but no old man in an odd hat and cloak and with
white hair was discoverable. Linger she might not. She reached a house
of which the front-door stood open; it looked black and cavernous
within; but she advanced with the step of familiarity, and went
downstairs to a front-kitchen. Through the half-open door came a strong
odour and a hissing sound, plainly due to the frying of sausages.
Before Jane could enter she was greeted sharply in a voice which was
young and that of a female, but had no other quality of graciousness.

'You've taken your time, my lady! All right! just wait till I've 'ad my
tea, that's all! Me an' you'll settle accounts to-night, see if we
don't. Mother told me as she owed you a lickin', and I'll pay it off,
with a little on my own account too. Only wait till I've 'ad my tea,
that's all. What are you standin' there for, like a fool? Bring that
beer 'ere, an' let's see 'ow much you've drank.'

'I haven't put my lips near it, miss; indeed I haven't,' pleaded the
child, whose face of dread proved both natural timidity and the
constant apprehension of ill-usage.

'Little liar! that's what you always was, an' always will be.-- Take
that!'

The speaker was a girl of sixteen, tall, rather bony, rudely handsome;
the hand with which she struck was large and coarse-fibred, the muscles
that impelled it vigorous. Her dress was that of a work-girl,
unsubstantial, ill-fitting, but of ambitious cut; her hair was very
abundant, and rose upon the back of her head in thick coils, an elegant
fringe depending in front. The fire had made her face scarlet, and in
the lamplight her large eyes glistened with many joys.

First and foremost, Miss Clementina Peckover rejoiced because she had
left work much earlier than usual, and was about to enjoy what she
would have described as a 'blow out.' Secondly, she rejoiced because
her mother, the landlady of the house, was absent for the night, and
consequently she would exercise sole authority over the domestic slave,
Jane Snowdon--that is to say, would indulge to the uttermost her
instincts of cruelty in tormenting a defenceless creature. Finally--a
cause of happiness antecedent to the others, but less vivid in her mind
at this moment--in the next room lay awaiting burial the corpse of Mrs.
Peckover's mother-in-law, whose death six days ago had plunged mother
and daughter into profound delight, partly because they were relieved
at length from making a pretence of humanity to a bed-ridden old woman,
partly owing to the fact that the deceased had left behind her a sum of
seventy-five pounds, exclusive of moneys due from a burial-club.

'Ah!' exclaimed Miss Peckover (who was affectionately known to her
intimates as 'Clem'), as she watched Jane stagger back from the blow,
and hide her face in silent endurance of pain. 'That's just a morsel to
stay your appetite, my lady! You didn't expect me back 'ome at this
time, did you? You thought as you was goin' to have the kitchen to
yourself when mother went. Ha ha! ho ho!--These sausages is done; now
you clean that fryin'-pan; and if I can find a speck of dirt in it as
big as 'arlf a farden, I'll take you by the 'air of the 'ed an' clean
it with your face, _that's_ what I'll do I Understand? Oh, I mean what
I say, my lady! Me an' you's a-goin' to spend a evenin' together,
there's no two ways about that. He ho! he he!'

The frankness of Clem's brutality went far towards redeeming her
character. The exquisite satisfaction with which she viewed Jane's
present misery, the broad joviality with which she gloated over the
prospect of cruelties shortly to be inflicted, put her at once on a par
with the noble savage running wild in woods. Civilisation could bring
no charge against this young woman; it and she had no common criterion.
Who knows but this lust of hers for sanguinary domination was the
natural enough issue of the brutalising serfdom of her predecessors in
the family line of the Peckovers? A thrall suddenly endowed with
authority will assuredly make bitter work for the luckless creature in
the next degree of thraldom.

A cloth was already spread across one end of the deal table, with such
other preparations for a meal as Clem deemed adequate. The
sausages--five in number--she had emptied from the frying-pan directly
on to her plate, and with them all the black rich juice that had exuded
in the process of cooking--particularly rich, owing to its having
several times caught fire and blazed triumphantly. On sitting down and
squaring her comely frame to work, the first thing Clem did was to take
a long draught out of the beer-jug; refreshed thus, she poured the
remaining liquor into a glass. Ready at hand was mustard, made in a
tea-cup; having taken a certain quantity of this condiment on to her
knife, she proceeded to spread each sausage with it from end to end,
patting them in a friendly way as she finished the operation. Next she
sprinkled them with pepper, and after that she constructed a little
pile of salt on the side of the plate, using her fingers to convey it
from the salt-cellar. It remained to cut a thick slice of bread--she
held the loaf pressed to her bosom whilst doing this--and to crush it
down well into the black grease beside the sausages; then Clem was
ready to begin.

For five minutes she fed heartily, showing really remarkable skill in
conveying pieces of sausage to her mouth by means of the knife alone.
Finding it necessary to breathe at last, she looked round at Jane. The
hand-maiden was on her knees near the fire, scrubbing very hard at the
pan with successive pieces of newspaper. It was a sight to increase the
gusto of Clem's meal, but of a sudden there came into the girl's mind a
yet more delightful thought. I have mentioned that in the back-kitchen
lay the body of a dead woman; it was already encoffined, and waited for
interment on the morrow, when Mrs. Peckover would arrive with a certain
female relative from St. Albans. Now the proximity of this corpse was a
ceaseless occasion of dread and misery to Jane Snowdon; the poor child
had each night to make up a bed for herself in this front-room,
dragging together a little heap of rags when mother and daughter were
gone up to their chamber, and since the old woman's death it was much
if Jane had enjoyed one hour of unbroken sleep. She endeavoured to hide
these feelings, but Clem, with her Bed Indian scent, divined them
accurately enough. She hit upon a good idea.

'Go into the next room,' she commanded suddenly, 'and fetch the matches
off of the mantel-piece. I shall want to go upstairs presently, to see
if you've scrubbed the bed-room well.'

Jane was blanched; but she rose from her knees at once, and reached a
candlestick from above the fireplace.

'What's that for?' shouted Clem, with her mouth full. 'You've no need
of a light to find the mantel-piece. If you're not off--'

Jane hastened from the kitchen. Clem yelled to her to close the door,
and she had no choice but to obey. In the dark passage outside there
was darkness that might be felt. The child all but fainted with the
sickness of horror as she turned the handle of the other door and began
to grope her way. She knew exactly where the coffin was; she knew that
to avoid touching it in the diminutive room was all but impossible. And
touch it she did. Her anguish uttered itself, not in a mere sound of
terror, but in a broken word or two of a prayer she knew by heart,
including a name which sounded like a charm against evil. She had
reached the mantel-piece; oh, she could not, could not find the matches
I Yes, at last her hand closed on them. A blind rush, and she was out
again in the passage. She re-entered the front-kitchen with limbs that
quivered, with the sound of dreadful voices ringing about her, and
blankness before her eyes.

Clem laughed heartily, then finished her beer in a long, enjoyable
pull. Her appetite was satisfied; the last trace of oleaginous matter
had disappeared from her plate, and now she toyed with little pieces of
bread lightly dipped into the mustard-pot. These _bonnes bouches_ put
her into excellent humour; presently she crossed her arms and leaned
back. There was no denying that Clem was handsome; at sixteen she had
all her charms in apparent maturity, and they were of the coarsely
magnificent order. Her forehead was low and of great width; her nose
was well shapen, and had large sensual apertures; her cruel lips may be
seen on certain fine antique busts; the neck that supported her heavy
head was splendidly rounded. In laughing, she became a model for an
artist, an embodiment of fierce life independent of morality. Her
health was probably less sound than it seemed to be; one would have
compared her, not to some piece of exuberant normal vegetation, but
rather to a rank, evilly-fostered growth. The putrid soil of that
nether world yields other forms besides the obviously blighted and
sapless.

'Have you done any work for Mrs. Hewett to-day?' she asked of her
victim, after sufficiently savouring the spectacle of terror.

'Yes, miss; I did the front-room fireplace, an' fetched fourteen of
coals, an' washed out a few things.'

'What did she give you?'

'A penny, miss. I gave it to Mrs. Peckover before she went.'

'Oh, you did? Well, look 'ere; you'll just remember in future that all
you get from the lodgers belongs to me, an' not to mother. It's a new
arrangement, understand. An' if you dare to give up a 'apenny to
mother, I'll lick you till you're nothin' but a bag o' bones.
Understand?'

Having on the spur of the moment devised this ingenious difficulty for
the child, who was sure to suffer in many ways from such a conflict of
authorities, Clem began to consider how she should spend her evening.
After all, Jane was too poor-spirited a victim to afford long
entertainment. Clem would have liked dealing with some one who showed
fight--some one with whom she could try savage issue in real
tooth-and-claw conflict. She had in mind a really exquisite piece of
cruelty, but it was a joy necessarily postponed to a late hour of the
night. In the meantime, it would perhaps be as well to take a stroll,
with a view of meeting a few friends as they came away from the
work-rooms. She was pondering the invention of some long and hard task
to be executed by Jane in her absence, when a knocking at the
house-door made itself heard. Clem at once went up to see who the
visitor was.

A woman in a long cloak and a showy bonnet stood on the step,
protecting herself with an umbrella from the bitter sleet which the
wind was now driving through the darkness. She said that she wished to
see Mrs. Hewett.

'Second-floor front,' replied Clem in the offhand, impertinent tone
wherewith she always signified to strangers her position in the house.

The visitor regarded her with a look of lofty contempt, and, having
deliberately closed her umbrella, advanced towards the stairs. Clem
drew into the back regions for a few moments, but as soon as she heard
the closing of a door in the upper part of the house, she too ascended,
going on tip-toe, with a noiselessness which indicated another side of
her character. Having reached the room which the visitor had entered,
she brought her ear close to the keyhole, and remained in that attitude
for a long time--nearly twenty minutes, in fact. Her sudden and swift
return to the foot of the stairs was followed by the descent of the
woman in the showy bonnet.

'Miss Peckover I' cried the latter when she had reached the foot of the
stairs.

'Well, what is it?' asked Clem, seeming to come up from the kitchen.

'Will you 'ave the goodness to go an' speak to Mrs. Hewett for a
hinstant?' said the woman, with much affectation of refined speech.

'All right! I will just now, if I've time.'

The visitor tossed her head and departed, whereupon Clem at once ran
upstairs. In five minutes she was back in the kitchen.

'See 'ere,' she addressed Jane. 'You know where Mr. Kirkwood works in
St. John's Square? You've been before now. Well, you're to go an' wait
at the door till he comes out, and then you're to tell him to come to
Mrs. Hewett at wunst. Understand?--Why ain't these tea-things all
cleared away? All right Wait till you come back, that's all. Now be
off, before I skin you alive!'

On the floor in a corner of the kitchen lay something that had once
been a girl's hat. This Jane at once snatched up and put on her head.
Without other covering, She ran forth upon her errand.




CHAPTER II

A FRIEND IN REQUEST

It was the hour of the unyoking of men. In the highways and byways of
Clerkenwell there was a thronging of released toilers, of young and
old, of male and female. Forth they streamed from factories and
workrooms, anxious to make the most of the few hours during which they
might live for themselves. Great numbers were still bent over their
labour, and would be for hours to come, but the majority had leave to
wend stablewards. Along the main thoroughfares the wheel-track was
clangorous; every omnibus that clattered by was heavily laden with
passengers; tarpaulins gleamed over the knees of those who sat outside.
This way and that the lights were blurred into a misty radiance;
overhead was mere blackness, whence descended the lashing rain. There
was a ceaseless scattering of mud; there were blocks in the traffic,
attended with rough jest or angry curse; there was jostling on the
crowded pavement. Public-houses began to brighten up, to bestir
themselves for the evening's business. Streets that had been hives of
activity since early morning were being abandoned to silence and
darkness and the sweeping wind.

At noon to-day there was sunlight on the Surrey hills; the fields and
lanes were fragrant with the first breath of spring, and from the
shelter of budding copses many a primrose looked tremblingly up to the
vision of blue sky. But of these things Clerkenwell takes no count;
here it had been a day like any other, consisting of so many hours,
each representing a fraction of the weekly wage. Go where you may in
Clerkenwell, on every hand are multiform evidences of toil, intolerable
as a nightmare. It is not as in those parts of London where the main
thoroughfares consist of shops and warehouses and workrooms, whilst the
streets that are hidden away on either hand are devoted in the main to
dwellings Here every alley is thronged with small industries; all but
every door and window exhibits the advertisement of a craft that is
carried on within. Here you may see how men have multiplied toil for
toil's sake, have wrought to devise work superfluous, have worn their
lives away in imagining new forms of weariness. The energy, the
ingenuity daily put forth in these grimy burrows task the brain's power
of wondering. But that those who sit here through the livelong day,
through every season, through all the years of the life that is granted
them, who strain their eyesight, who overtax their muscles, who nurse
disease in their frames, who put resolutely from them the thought of
what existence _might_ be--that these do it all without prospect or
hope of reward save the permission to eat and sleep and bring into the
world other creatures to strive with them for bread, surely that
thought is yet more marvellous.

Workers in metal, workers in glass and in enamel, workers in weed,
workers in every substance on earth, or from the waters under the
earth, that can be made commercially valuable. In Clerkenwell the
demand is not so much for rude strength as for the cunning fingers and
the contriving brain. The inscriptions on the house-fronts would make
you believe that you were in a region of gold and silver and precious
stones. In the recesses of dim byways, where sunshine and free air are
forgotten things, where families herd together in dear-rented garrets
and cellars, craftsmen are for ever handling jewellery, shaping bright
ornaments for the necks and arms of such as are born to the joy of
life. Wealth inestimable is ever flowing through these workshops, and
the hands that have been stained with gold-dust may, as likely as not,
some day extend themselves in petition for a crust. In this house, as
the announcement tells you, business is carried on by a trader in
diamonds, and next door is a den full of children who wait for their
day's one meal until their mother has come home with her chance
earnings. A strange enough region wherein to wander and muse.
Inextinguishable laughter were perchance the fittest result of such
musing; yet somehow the heart grows heavy, somehow the blood is
troubled in its course, and the pulses begin to throb hotly.

Amid the crowds of workpeople, Jane Snowdon made what speed she might.
It was her custom, whenever dispatched on an errand, to run till she
could run no longer, then to hasten along panting until breath and
strength were recovered. When it was either of the Peckovers who sent
her, she knew that reprimand was inevitable on her return, be she ever
so speedy; but her nature was incapable alike of rebellion and of that
sullen callousness which would have come to the aid of most girls in
her position. She did not serve her tyrants with willingness, for their
brutality filled her with a sense of injustice; yet the fact that she
was utterly dependent upon them for her livelihood, that but for their
grace--as they were perpetually reminding her--she would have been a
workhouse child, had a mitigating effect upon the bitterness she could
not wholly subdue.

There was, however, another reason why she sped eagerly on her present
mission. The man to whom she was conveying Mrs. Hewett's message was
one of the very few persons who had ever treated her with human
kindness. She had known him by name and by sight for some years, and
since her mother's death (she was eleven when that happened) he had by
degrees grown to represent all that she understood by the word
'friend.' It was seldom that words were exchanged between them; the
opportunity came scarcely oftener than once a month; but whenever it
did come, it made a bright moment in her existence. Once before she had
fetched him of an evening to see Mrs. Hewett, and as they walked
together he had spoken with what seemed to her wonderful gentleness,
with consideration inconceivable from a tall, bearded man,
well-dressed, and well to do in the world. Perhaps he would speak in
the same way to-night; the thought of it made her regardless of the
cold rain that was drenching her miserable garment, of the wind that
now and then, as she turned a corner, took away her breath, and made
her cease from running.

She reached St. John's Square, and paused at length by a door on which
was the inscription: 'H. Lewis, Working Jeweller.' It was just possible
that the men had already left; she waited for several minutes with
anxious mind. No; the door opened, and two workmen came forth. Jane's
eagerness impelled her to address one of them.

'Please, sir, Mr. Kirkwood hasn't gone yet, has he?'

'No, he ain't,' the man answered pleasantly; and turning back, he
called to some one within the doorway; 'Hello, Sidney! here's your
sweetheart waiting for you.'

Jane shrank aside; but in a moment she saw a familiar figure; she
advanced again, and eagerly delivered her message.

'All right, Jane! I'll walk on with you,' was the reply. And whilst the
other two men were laughing good-naturedly, Kirkwood strode away by the
girl's side. He seemed to be absent-minded, and for some hundred yards'
distance was silent; then he stopped of a sudden and looked down at his
companion.

'Why, Jane,' he said, 'you'll get your death, running about in weather
like this.' He touched her dress. 'I thought so; you're wet through.'

There followed an inarticulate growl, and immediately he stripped off
his short overcoat.

'Here, put this on, right over your head. Do as I tell you, child!'

He seemed impatient to-night. Wasn't he going to talk with her as
before? Jane felt her heart sinking. With her hunger for kind and
gentle words, she thought nothing of the character of the night, and
that Sidney Kirkwood might reasonably be anxious to get over the ground
as quickly as possible.

'How is Mrs. Hewett?' Sidney asked, when they were walking on again.
'Still poorly, eh? And the baby?'

Then he was again mute. Jane had something she wished to say to
him--wished very much indeed, yet she felt it would have been difficult
even if he had encouraged her. As he kept silence and walked so
quickly, speech on her part was utterly forbidden. Kirkwood, however,
suddenly remembered that his strides were disproportionate to the
child's steps. She was an odd figure thus disguised in his over-jacket;
he caught a glimpse of her face by a street lamp, and smiled, but with
a mixture of pain.

'Feel a bit warmer so?' he asked.

'Oh yes, sir.'

'Haven't you got a jacket, Jane?'

'It's all to pieces, sir. They're goin' to have it mended, I think.'

'They' was the word by which alone Jane ventured to indicate her aunt.

'Going to, eh? I think they'd better be quick about it.'

Ha! that was the old tone of kindness! How it entered into her blood
and warmed it! She allowed herself one quick glance at him.

'Do I walk too quick for you?'

'Oh no, sir. Mr. Kirkwood, please, there's something I--'

The sentence had, as it were, begun itself, but timidity cut it short.
Sidney stopped and looked at her.

'What? Something you wanted to tell me, Jane?'

He encouraged her, and at length she made her disclosure. It was of
what had happened in the public-house. The young man listened with much
attention, walking very slowly. He got her to repeat her second-hand
description of the old man who had been inquiring for people named
Snowdon.

'To think that you should have been just too late!' he exclaimed with
annoyance. 'Have you any idea who he was?'

'I can't think, sir,' Jane replied sadly.

Sidney took a hopeful tone--thought it very likely that the inquirer
would pursue his search with success, being so near the house where
Jane's parents had lived.

'I'll keep my eyes open,' he said. 'Perhaps I might see him. He'd be
easy to recognise, I should think.'

'And would you tell him, sir,' Jane asked eagerly.

'Why, of course I would. You'd like me to, wouldn't you?'

Jane's reply left small doubt on that score. Her companion looked down
at her again, and said with compassionate gentleness:

'Keep a good heart, Jane. Things'll be better some day, no doubt.'

'Do you think so, sir?'

The significance of the simple words was beyond all that eloquence
could have conveyed. Sidney muttered to himself, as he had done before,
like one who is angry. He laid his hand on the child's shoulder for a
moment.

A few minutes more, and they were passing along by the prison wall,
under the ghastly head, now happily concealed by darkness. Jane stopped
a little short of the house and removed the coat that had so
effectually sheltered her.

'Thank you, sir,' she said, returning it to Sidney.

He took it without speaking, and threw it over his arm. At the door,
now closed, Jane gave a single knock; they were admitted by Clem, who,
in regarding Kirkwood, wore her haughtiest demeanour. This young man
had never paid homage of any kind to Miss Peckover, and such neglect
was by no means what she was used to. Other men who came to the house
took every opportunity of paying her broad compliments, and some went
so far as to offer practical testimony of their admiration. Sidney
merely had a 'How do you do, miss?' at her service. Coquetry had failed
to soften him; Clem accordingly behaved as if he had given her mortal
offence on some recent occasion. She took care, moreover, to fling a
few fierce words at Jane before the latter disappeared into the house.
Thereupon Sidney looked at her sternly; he said nothing, knowing that
interference would only result in harsher treatment for the poor little
slave.

'You know your way upstairs, I b'lieve,' said Clem, as if he were all
but a stranger.

'Thank you, I do,' was Sidney's reply.

Indeed he had climbed these stairs innumerable times during the last
three years; the musty smells were associated with ever so many bygone
thoughts and states of feeling; the stains on the wall (had it been
daylight), the irregularities of the bare wooden steps, were
remembrancers of projects and hopes and disappointments. For many
months now every visit had been with heavier heart; his tap at the
Hewetts' door had a melancholy sound to him.

A woman's voice bade him enter. He stepped into a room which was not
disorderly or unclean, but presented the chill discomfort of poverty.
The principal, almost the only, articles of furniture were a large bed,
a wash-hand stand; a kitchen table, and two or three chairs, of which
the cane seats were bulged and torn. A few meaningless pictures hung
here and there, and on the mantel-piece, which sloped forward somewhat,
stood some paltry ornaments, secured in their places by a piece of
string stretched in front of them. The living occupants were four
children and their mother. Two little girls, six and seven years old
respectively, were on the floor near the fire; a boy of four was
playing with pieces of fire-wood at the table. The remaining child was
an infant, born but a fortnight ago, lying at its mother's breast. Mrs.
Hewett sat on the bed, and bent forward in an attitude of physical
weakness. Her age was twenty-seven, but she looked several years older.
At nineteen she had married; her husband, John Hewett, having two
children by a previous union. Her face could never have been very
attractive, but it was good-natured, and wore its pleasantest aspect as
she smiled on Sidney's entrance. You would have classed her at once
with those feeble-willed, weak-minded, yet kindly-disposed women, who
are only too ready to meet affliction half-way, and who, if
circumstances be calamitous, are more harmful than an enemy to those
they hold dear. She was rather wrapped up than dressed, and her hair,
thin and pale-coloured, was tied in a ragged knot. She wore slippers,
the upper parts of which still adhered to the soles only by miracle. It
looked very much as if the same relation subsisted between her frame
and the life that informed it, for there was no blood in her cheeks, no
lustre in her eye. The baby at her bosom moaned in the act of sucking;
one knew not how the poor woman could supply sustenance to another
being.

The children were not dirty nor uncared for, but their clothing hung
very loosely upon them; their flesh was unhealthy, their voices had an
unnatural sound.

Sidney stepped up to the bed and gave his hand.

'I'm so glad you've come before Clara,' said Mrs. Hewett. 'I hoped you
would. But she can't be long, an' I want to speak to you first. It's a
bad night, isn't it? Yes, I feel it in my throat, and it goes right
through my chest--just 'ere, look! And I haven't slep' not a hour a
night this last week; it makes me feel that low. I want to get to the
Orspital, if I can, in a day or two.'

'But doesn't the doctor come still?' asked Sidney, drawing a chair near
to her.

'Well, I didn't think it was right to go on payin' him, an' that's the
truth. I'll go to the Orspital, an' they'll give me somethin'. I look
bad, don't I, Sidney?'

'You look as if you'd no business to be out of bed,' returned the young
man in a grumbling voice.

'Oh, I _can't_ lie still, so it's no use talkin'! But see, I want to
speak about Clara. That woman Mrs. Tubbs has been here to see me,
talkin' an' talkin'. She says she'll give Clara five shillin' a week,
as well as board an' lodge her. I don't know what to do about it, that
I don't. Clara, she's that set on goin', an' her father's that set
against it. It seems as if it 'ud be a good thing, don't it, Sidney? I
know _you_ don't want her to go, but what's to be done? What _is_ to be
done?'

Her wailing voice caused the baby to wail likewise. Kirkwood looked
about the room with face set in anxious discontent.

'Is it no use, Mrs. Hewett?' he exclaimed suddenly, turning to her.
'Does she mean it? Won't she ever listen to me?'

The woman shook her head miserably; her eyes filled with tears.

'I've done all I could,' she replied, half sobbing. 'I have; you know I
have, Sidney! She's that 'eadstrong, it seems as if she wouldn't listen
to nobody--at least nobody as we knows anything about.'

'What do you mean by that?' he inquired abruptly. 'Do you think there's
any one else?'

'How can I tell? I've got no reason for thinkin' it, but how can I
tell? No, I believe it's nothin' but her self-will an' the fancies
she's got into her 'ead. Both her an' Bob, there's no doin' nothin'
with them. Bob, he's that wasteful with his money; an' now he talks
about goin' an' gettin' a room in another 'ouse, when he might just as
well make all the savin' he can. But no, that ain't his idea, nor yet
his sister's. I suppose it's their mother as they take after, though
their father he won't own to it, an' I don't blame him for not speakin'
ill of her as is gone. I should be that wretched if I thought my own
was goin' to turn out the same. But there's John, he ain't a wasteful
man; no one can't say it of him. He's got his fancies, but they've
never made him selfish to others, as well you know, Sidney. He's been
the best 'usband to me as ever a poor woman had, an' I'll say it with
my last breath.'

She cried pitifully for a few moments. Sidney, mastering his own
wretchedness, which he could not altogether conceal, made attempts to
strengthen her.

'When things are at the worst they begin to mend,' he said. 'It can't
be much longer before he gets work. And look here, Mrs. Hewett, I won't
hear a word against it; you must and shall let me lend you something to
go on with!'

'I dursn't, I dursn't, Sidney! John won't have it. He's always
a-saying: "Once begin that, an' it's all up; you never earn no more of
your own." It's one of his fancies, an' you know it is. You'll only
make trouble, Sidney.'

'Well, all I can say is, he's an unreasonable and selfish man!'

'No, no; John ain't selfish! Never say that! It's only his fancies,
Sidney.'

'Well, there's one trouble you'd better get rid of, at all events. Let
Clara go to Mrs. Tubbs. You'll never have any peace till she does, I
can see that. Why shouldn't she go, after all? She's seventeen; if she
can't respect herself now, she never will, and there's no help for it.
Tell John to let her go.'

There was bitterness in the tone with which he gave this advice; he
threw out his hands impatiently, and then flung himself back, so that
the cranky chair creaked and tottered.

'An' if 'arm comes to her, what then?' returned Mrs. Hewett
plaintively. 'We know well enough why Mrs. Tubbs wants her; it's only
because she's good-lookin', an' she'll bring more people to the bar.
John knows that, an' it makes him wild. Mind what I'm tellin' you,
Sidney; if any 'arm comes to that girl, her father'll go out of his
'ead. I know he will! I know he will! He worships the ground as she
walks on, an' if it hadn't been for that, she'd never have given him
the trouble as she is doin'. It 'ud a been better for her if she'd had
a father like mine, as was a hard, careless man. I don't wish to say no
'arm of him as is dead an' buried, an' my own father too, but he was a
hard father to us, an' as long as he lived we dursn't say not a word as
he didn't like. He'd a killed me if I'd gone on like Clara. It was a
good thing as he was gone, before--'

'Don't, don't speak of that,' interposed Kirkwood, with kindly
firmness. 'That's long since over and done with and forgotten.'

'No, no; not forgotten. Clara knows, an' that's partly why she makes so
little of me; I know it is.'

'I don't believe it! She's a good-hearted girl--'

A heavy footstep on the stairs checked him. The door was thrown open,
and there entered a youth of nineteen, clad as an artisan. He was a
shapely fellow, though not quite so stout as perfect health would have
made him, and had a face of singular attractiveness,
clear-complexioned, delicate featured, a-gleam with intelligence. The
intelligence was perhaps even too pronounced; seen in profile, the
countenance had an excessive eagerness; there was selfish force about
the lips, moreover, which would have been better away. His noisy
entrance indicated an impulsive character, and the nod with which he
greeted Kirkwood was self-sufficient.

'Where's that medal I cast last night, mother?' he asked, searching in
various corners of the room and throwing things about.

'Now, do mind what you're up to, Bob!' remonstrated Mrs. Hewett.
'You'll find it on the mantel in the other room. Don't make such a
noise.'

The young man rushed forth, and in a moment returned. In his hand,
which was very black, and shone as if from the manipulation of metals,
he held a small bright medal. He showed it to Sidney, saying, 'What
d'you think o' that?'

The work was delicate and of clever design; it represented a racehorse
at full speed, a jockey rising in the stirrups and beating it with
orthodox brutality.

'That's "Tally-ho" at the Epsom Spring Meetin',' he said. 'I've got
money on him!'

And, with another indifferent nod, he flung out of the room.

Before Mrs. Hewett and Kirkwood could renew their conversation, there
was another step at the door, and the father of the family presented
himself.




CHAPTER III

A SUPERFLUOUS FAMILY

Kirkwood's face, as he turned to greet the new-comer, changed suddenly
to an expression of surprise.

'Why, what have you been doing to your hair?' he asked abruptly.

A stranger would have seen nothing remarkable in John Hewett's hair,
unless he had reflected that, being so sparse, it had preserved its
dark hue and its gloss somewhat unusually. The short beard and whiskers
were also of richer colour than comported with the rest of the man's
appearance. Judging from his features alone, one would have taken John
for sixty at least; his years were in truth not quite two-and-fifty. He
had the look of one worn out with anxiety and hardship; the lines
engraven upon his face were of extraordinary depth and frequency; there
seemed to be little flesh between the dry skin and the bones which
sharply outlined his visage. The lips were, like those of his son,
prominent and nervous, but none of Bob's shrewdness was here
discoverable; feeling rather than intellect appeared to be the father's
characteristic. His eyes expressed self-will, perhaps obstinacy, and he
had a peculiarly dogged manner of holding his head. At the present
moment he was suffering from extreme fatigue; he let himself sink upon
a chair, threw his hat on to the floor, and rested a hand on each knee.
His boots were thickly covered with mud; his corduroy trousers were
splashed with the same. Rain had drenched him; it trickled to the floor
from all his garments.

For answer to Sidney's question, he nodded towards his wife, and said
in a thick voice, 'Ask her.'

'He's dyed it,' Mrs. Hewett explained, with no smile. 'He thought one
of the reasons why he couldn't get work was his lookin' too old.'

'An' so it was,' exclaimed Hewett, with an angry vehemence which at
once declared his position and revealed much of his history. 'So it was.
My hair was a bit turned, an' nowadays there's no chance for old men.
Ask any one you like. Why, there's Sam Lang couldn't even get a job at
gardenin' 'cause his hair was a bit turned. It was him as told me what
to do. "Dye your hair, Jack," he says; "it's what I've had to myself,"
he says. "They won't have old men nowadays, at no price." Why, there's
Jarvey the painter; you know him, Sidney. His guvnor sent him on a job
to Jones's place, an' they sent him back. "Why, he's an old man," they
says. "What good's a man of that age for liftin' ladders about?" An'
Jarvey's no older than me.'

Sidney knitted his brows. He had heard the complaint from too many men
to be able to dispute its justice.

'When there's twice too many of us for the work that's to be done,'
pursued John, 'what else can you expect? The old uns have to give way,
of course. Let 'em beg; let 'em starve! What use are they?'

Mrs. Hewett had put a kettle on the fire, and began to arrange the
table for a meal.

'Go an' get your wet things off, John,' she said. 'You'll be havin'
your rheumatics again.'

'Never mind me, Maggie. What business have you to be up an' about? You
need a good deal more takin' care of than I do. Here, let Amy get the
tea.'

The three children, Amy, Annie, and Tom, had come forward, as only
children do who are wont to be treated affectionately on their father's
return. John had a kiss and a caress for each of them; then he stepped
to the bed and looked at his latest born. The baby was moaning feebly;
he spoke no word to it, and on turning away glanced about the room
absently. In the meantime his wife had taken some clothing from a chest
of drawers, and at length he was persuaded to go into the other room
and change. When he returned, the meal was ready. It consisted of a
scrap of cold steak, left over from yesterday, and still upon the
original dish amid congealed fat; a spongy half-quartern loaf, that
species of baker's bread of which a great quantity can be consumed with
small effect on the appetite; a shapeless piece of something purchased
under the name of butter, dabbed into a shallow basin; some pickled
cabbage in a tea-cup; and, lastly, a pot of tea, made by adding a
teaspoonful or two to the saturated leaves which had already served at
breakfast and mid-day. This repast was laid on a very dirty cloth. The
cups were unmatched and chipped, the knives were in all stages of
decrepitude; the teapot was of dirty tin, with a damaged spout.

Sidney began to affect cheerfulness. He took little Annie on one of his
knees, and Tom on the other. The mature Amy presided. Hewett ate the
morsel of meat, evidently without thinking about it; he crumbled a
piece of bread, and munched mouthfuls in silence. Of the vapid liquor
called tea he drank cup after cup.

'What's the time?' he asked at length. 'Where's Clara?'

'I daresay she's doin' overtime,' replied his wife. 'She won't be much
longer.'

The man was incapable of remaining in one spot for more than a few
minutes. Now he went to look at the baby; now he stirred the fire; now
he walked across the room aimlessly. He was the embodiment of worry. As
soon as the meal was over, Amy, Annie, and Tom were sent off to bed.
They occupied the second room, together with Clara; Bob shared the bed
of a fellow-workman upstairs. This was great extravagance, obviously;
other people would have made two rooms sufficient for all, and many
such families would have put up with one. But Hewett had his ideas of
decency, and stuck to them with characteristic wilfulness.

'Where do you think I've been this afternoon?' John began, when the
three little ones were gone, and Mrs. Hewett had been persuaded to lie
down upon the bed. 'Walked to Enfleld an' back. I was told of a job out
there; but it's no good; they're full up. They say exercise is good for
the 'ealth. I shall be a 'ealthy man before long, it seems to me. What
do _you_ think?'

'Have you been to see Corder again?' asked Sidney, after reflecting
anxiously.

'No, I haven't!' was the angry reply; 'an' what's more, I ain't goin'
to! He's one o' them men I can't get on with. As long as you make
yourself small before him, an' say "sir" to him with every other word,
an' keep tellin' him as he's your Providence on earth, an' as you don't
know how ever you'd get on without him--well, it's all square, an'
he'll keep you on the job. That's just what I _can't_ do--never could,
an' never shall. I should have to hear them children cryin' for food
before I could do it. So don't speak to me about Corder again. It makes
me wild!'

Sidney tapped the floor with his foot. Himself a single man, without
responsibilities, always in fairly good work, he could not invariably
sympathise with Hewett's sore and impracticable pride. His own temper
did not err in the direction of meekness, but as he looked round the
room he felt that a home such as this would drive him to any degree of
humiliation. John knew what the young man's thoughts were; he resumed
in a voice of exasperated bitterness.

'No, I haven't been to Corder--I beg his pardon; _Mister_ Corder--James
Corder, Esquire. But where do you think I went this mornin'? Mrs.
Peckover brought up a paper an' showed me an advertisement. Gorbutt in
Goswell Bead wanted a man to clean windows an' sweep up, an' so
on;--offered fifteen bob a week. Well, I went. Didn't I, mother? Didn't
I go after that job? I got there at half-past eight; an' what do you
think I found? If there was one man standin' at Gorbutt's door, _there
was five hundred_! Don't you believe me? You go an' ask them as lives
about there. If there was one, there was five hundred! Why, the p'lice
had to come an' keep the road clear. Fifteen bob! What was the use o' me
standin' there, outside the crowd? What was the use, I say? Such a lot
o' poor starvin' devils you never saw brought together in all your
life. There they was, lookin' ready to fight with one another for the
fifteen bob a week. Didn't I come back and tell you about it, mother?
An' if they'd all felt like me, they'd a turned against the shop an'
smashed it up--ay, an' every other shop in the street! What use? Why,
no use; but I tell you that's how I felt. If any man had said as much
as a rough word to me, I'd a gone at him like a bulldog. I felt like a
beast. I wanted to fight, I tell you--to fight till the life was kicked
an' throttled out of me!'

'John, don't, don't go on in that way,' cried his wife, sobbing
miserably. 'Don't let him go on like that, Sidney.'

Hewett jumped up and walked about.

'What's the time?' he asked the next moment. And when Sidney told him
that it was half-past nine, he exclaimed, 'Then why hasn't Clara come
'ome? What's gone with her?'

'Perhaps she's at Mrs. Tubbs's,' replied his wife, in a low voice,
looking at Kirkwood.

'An' what call has she to be there? Who gave her leave to go there?'

There was another exchange of looks between Sidney and Mrs. Hewett;
then the latter with hesitation and timidity told of Mrs. Tubbs's visit
to her that evening, and of the proposals the woman had made.

'I won't hear of it:' cried John. 'I won't have my girl go for a
barmaid, so there's an end of it. I tell you she shan't go!'

'I can understand you, Mr. Hewett,' said Sidney, in a tone of argument
softened by deference; 'but don't you think you'd better make a few
inquiries, at all events? You see, it isn't exactly a barmaid's place.
I mean to say, Mrs. Tubbs doesn't keep a public-house where people
stand about drinking all day. It is only a luncheon-bar, and
respectable enough.'

John turned and regarded him with astonishment.

'Why, I thought you was as much set against it as me? What's made you
come round like this? I s'pose you've got tired of her, an' that's made
you so you don't care.'
