
The young man's eyes flashed angrily, but before he could make a
rejoinder Mrs. Hewett interposed.

'For shame o' yourself, John If you can't talk better sense than that,
don't talk at all. He don't mean it, Sidney. He's half drove off his
head with trouble.'

'If he does think it,' said Kirkwood, speaking sternly but with
self-command, 'let him say what he likes. He can't say worse than I
should deserve.'

There was an instant of silence. Hewett's head hung with more than the
usual doggedness. Then he addressed Sidney, sullenly, but in a tone
which admitted his error.

'What have you got to say? Never mind me. I'm only the girl's father,
an' there's not much heed paid to fathers nowadays. What have you got
to say about Clara? If you've changed your mind about her goin' there,
just tell me why.'

Sidney could not bring himself to speak at once, but an appealing look
from Mrs. Hewett decided him.

'Look here, Mr. Hewett,' he began, with blunt earnestness. If any harm
came to Clara I should feel it every bit as much as you, and that you
ought to know by this time. All the same, what I've got to say is this:
Let her go to Mrs. Tubbs for a month's trial. If you persist in
refusing her, mark my words, you'll be sorry. I've thought it all over,
and I know what I'm talking about. The girl can't put up with the work
room any longer. It's ruining her health, for one thing, anybody can
see that, and it's making her so discontented, she'll soon get
reckless. I understand your feeling well enough, but I understand her
as well; at all events, I believe I do. She wants a change; she's
getting tired of her very life.'

'Very well,' cried the father in shrill irritation, 'why doesn't she
take the change that's offered to her? She's no need to go neither to
workroom nor to bar. There's a good home waiting for her, isn't there?
What's come to the girl? She used to go on as if she liked you well
enough.'

'A girl alters a deal between fifteen and seventeen,' Sidney replied,
forcing himself to speak with an air of calmness, of impartiality. 'She
wasn't old enough to know her own mind. I'm tired of plaguing her. I
feel ashamed to say another word to her, and that's the truth. She only
gets more and more set against me. If it's ever to come right, it'll
have to be by waiting; we won't talk about that any more. Think of her
quite apart from me, and what I've been hoping. She's seventeen years
old. You can't deal with a girl of that age like you can with Amy and
Annie. You'll have to trust her, Mr. Hewett. You'll have to, because
there's no help for it. We're working people, we are; we're the lower
orders; our girls have to go out and get their livings. We teach them
the best we can, and the devil knows they've got examples enough of
misery and ruin before their eyes to help them to keep straight. Rich
people can take care of their daughters as much as they like; they can
treat them like children till they're married; people of our kind can't
do that, and it has to be faced.'

John sat with dark brow, his eyes staring on vacancy.

'It's right what Sidney says, father,' put in Mrs. Hewett; 'we can't
help it.'

'You may perhaps have done harm when you meant only to do good,'
pursued Sidney. 'Always being so anxious, and showing what account you
make of her, perhaps you've led her to think a little too much of
herself. She knows other fathers don't go on in that way. And now she
wants more freedom, she feels it worse than other girls do when you
begin to deny her. Talk to her in a different way; talk as if you
trusted her. Depend upon it, it's the only hold you have upon her.
Don't be so much afraid. Clara has her faults--see them as well as any
one--but I'll never believe she'd darken your life of her own free
will.'

There was an unevenness, a jerky vehemence, in his voice, which told
how difficult it was for him to take this side in argument. He often
hesitated, obviously seeking phrases which should do least injury to
the father's feelings. The expression of pain on his forehead and about
his lips testified to the sincerity with which he urged his views, at
the same time to a lurking fear lest impulse should be misleading him.
Hewett kept silence, in aspect as far as ever from yielding. Of a
sudden he raised his hand, and said, 'Husht!' There was a familiar step
on the stairs. Then the door opened and admitted Clara.

The girl could not but be aware that the conversation she interrupted
had reference to herself. Her father gazed fixedly at her; Sidney
glanced towards her with self-consciousness, and at once averted his
eyes; Mrs. Hewett examined her with apprehension. Having carelessly
closed the door with a push, she placed her umbrella in the corner and
began to unbutton her gloves. Her attitude was one of affected
unconcern; she held her head stiffly, and let her eyes wander to the
farther end of the room. The expression of her face was cold,
preoccupied; she bit her lower lip so that the under part of it
protruded.

'Where have you been, Clara?' her father asked.

She did not answer immediately, but finished drawing off her gloves and
rolled them up by turning one over the other. Then she said
indifferently:

'I've been to see Mrs. Tubbs.'

'And who gave you leave?' asked Hewett with irritation.

'I don't see that I needed any leave. I knew she was coming here to
speak to you or mother, so I went, after work, to ask what you'd said.'

She was not above the middle stature of women, but her slimness and
erectness, and the kind of costume she wore made her seem tall as she
stood in this low-ceiled room. Her features were of very uncommon type,
at once sensually attractive and bearing the stamp of intellectual
vigour. The profile was cold, subtle, original; in full face, her high
cheekbones and the heavy, almost horizontal line of her eyebrows were
the points that first drew attention, conveying an idea of force of
character. The eyes themselves were hazel-coloured, and, whatever her
mood, preserved a singular pathos of expression, a look as of
self-pity, of unconscious appeal against some injustice. In contrast
with this her lips were defiant, insolent, unscrupulous; a shadow of
the naivete of childhood still lingered upon them, but, though you
divined the earlier pout of the spoilt girl, you felt that it must have
foretold this danger-signal in the mature woman. Such cast of
countenance could belong only to one who intensified in her personality
an inheritance of revolt; who, combining the temper of an ambitious
woman with the forces of a man's brain, had early learnt that the world
was not her friend nor the world's law.

Her clothing made but poor protection against the rigours of a London
winter. Its peculiarity (bearing in mind her position) was the lack of
any pretended elegance. A close-fitting, short jacket of plain cloth
made evident the grace of her bust; beneath was a brown dress with one
row of kilting. She wore a hat of brown felt, the crown rising from
back to front, the narrow brim closely turned up all round. The high
collar of the jacket alone sheltered her neck. Her gloves, though worn,
were obviously of good kid; her boots--strangest thing of all in a
work-girl's daily attire--were both strong and shapely. This simplicity
seemed a declaration that she could not afford genuine luxuries and
scorned to deck herself with shams.

The manner of her reply inflamed Hewett with impotent wrath. He smote
the table violently, then sprang up and flung his chair aside.

'Is that the way you've learnt to speak to your father?' he shouted.
'Haven't I told you you're not to go nowhere without my leave or your
mother's? Do you pay no heed to what I bid you? If so, say it! Say it
at once, and have done with it.'

Clara was quietly removing her hat. In doing so, she disclosed the one
thing which gave proof of regard for personal appearance. Her hair was
elaborately dressed. Drawn up from the neck, it was disposed in thick
plaits upon the top of her head; in front were a few rows of crisping.
She affected to be quite unaware that words had been spoken to her, and
stood smoothing each side of her forehead.

John strode forward and laid his hands roughly upon her shoulders.

'Look at me, will you? Speak, will you?'

Clara jerked herself from his grasp and regarded him with insolent
surprise. Of fear there was no trace upon her countenance; she seemed
to experience only astonishment at such unwonted behaviour from her
father, and resentment on her own behalf. Sidney Kirkwood had risen,
and advanced a step or two, as if in apprehension of harm to the girl,
but his interference was unneeded. Hewett recovered his self-control as
soon as Clara repelled him. It was the first time he had ever laid a
hand upon one of his children other than gently; his exasperation came
of over-tried nerves, of the experiences he had gone through in search
of work that day, and the keen suffering occasioned by his argument
with Sidney. The practical confirmation of Sidney's warning that he
must no longer hope to control Clara like a child stung him too
poignantly; he obeyed an unreasoning impulse to recover his authority
by force.

The girl's look entered his heart like a stab; she had never faced him
like this before, saying more plainly than with words that she defied
him to control her. His child's face, the face he loved best of all!
yet at this moment he was searching it vainly for the lineaments that
were familiar to him. Something had changed her, had hardened her
against him, in a moment. It seemed impossible that there should come
such severance between them. John revolted against it, as against all
the other natural laws that visited him harshly.

'What's come to you, my girl?' he said in a thick voice. 'What's wrong
between us, Clara? Haven't I always done my best for you? If I was the
worst enemy you had, you couldn't look at me crueller.'

'I think it's me that should ask what's come to _you_, father,' she
returned with her former self-possession. 'You treat me as if I was a
baby. I want to know what you're going to say about Mrs. Tubbs. I
suppose mother's told you what she offers me?'

Sidney had not resumed his chair. Before Hewett could reply he said:

'I think I'll leave you to talk over this alone.'

'No; stay where you are,' said John gruffly. 'Look here, Clara.
Sidney's been talkin' to me; he's been sayin' that I ought to let you
have your own way in this. Yes, you may well look as if it surprised
you.' Clara had just glanced at the young man, slightly raising her
eyebrows, but at once looked away again with a careless movement of the
head. 'He says what it's hard an' cruel for me to believe, though I
half begin to see that he's right; he says you won't pay no more heed
to what _I_ wish, an' it's me now must give way to you. I didn't use to
think me an' Clara would come to that; but it looks like it--it looks
like it.'

The girl stood with downcast eyes. Once more her face had suffered a
change; the lips were no longer malignant, her forehead had relaxed
from its haughty frown. The past fortnight had been a period of contest
between her father's stubborn fears and her own determination to change
the mode of her life. Her self-will was only intensified by opposition.
John had often enough experienced this, but hitherto the points at
issue had been trifles, matters in which the father could yield for the
sake of pleasing his child. Serious resistance brought out for the
first time all the selfish forces of her nature. She was prepared to go
all lengths rather than submit, now the question of her liberty had
once been broached. Already there was a plan in her mind for quitting
home, regardless of all the misery she would cause, reckless of what
future might be in store for herself. But the first sign of yielding on
her father's part touched the gentler elements of her nature. Thus was
she constituted; merciless in egotism when put to the use of all her
weapons, moved to warmest gratitude as soon as concession was made to
her. To be on ill terms with her father had caused her pain, the only
effect of which, however, was to heighten the sullen impracticability
of her temper. At the first glimpse of relief from overstrained
emotions, she desired that all angry feeling should be at an end.
Having gained her point, she could once more be the affectionately
wilful girl whose love was the first necessity of John Hewett's
existence.

'Well,' John pursued, reading her features eagerly, 'I'll say no more
about that, and I won't stand in the way of what you've set your mind
on. But understand, Clara, my girl! It's because Sidney persuaded me.
Sidney answers for it, mind you that!'

His voice trembled, and he looked at the young man with something like
anger in his eyes.

'I'm willing to do that, Mr. Hewett,' said Kirkwood in a low but firm
voice, his eyes turned away from Clara. 'No human being can answer for
another in the real meaning of the word; but I take upon myself to say
that Clara will bring you no sorrow. She hears me say it. They're not
the kind of words that a man speaks without thought of what they mean.'

Clara had seated herself by the table, and was moving a finger along
the pattern of the dirty white cloth. She bit her under-lip in the
manner already described, seemingly her habit when she wished to avoid
any marked expression of countenance.

'I can't see what Mr. Kirkwood's got to do with it at all,' she said,
with indifference, which now, however, was rather good-humoured than
the reverse. 'I'm sure I don't want anybody to answer for _me_.' A
slight toss of the head. 'You'd have let me go in any case, father; so
I don't see you need bring Mr. Kirkwood's name in.'

Hewett turned away to the fireplace and hung his head. Sidney, gazing
darkly at the girl, saw her look towards him, and she smiled. The
strange effect of that smile upon her features! It gave gentleness to
the mouth, and, by making more manifest the intelligent light of her
eyes, emphasised the singular pathos inseparable from their regard. It
was a smile to which a man would concede anything, which would vanquish
every prepossession, which would inspire pity and tenderness and
devotion in the heart of sternest resentment.

Sidney knew its power only too well; he averted his face. Then Clara
rose again and said:

'I shall just walk round and tell Mrs. Tubbs. It isn't late, and she'd
like to know as soon as possible.'

'Oh, surely it'll do in the mornin'!' exclaimed Mrs. Hewett, who had
followed the conversation in silent anxiety.

Clara paid no attention, but at once put on her hat again. Then she
said, 'I won't be long, father,' and moved towards the door.

Hewett did not look round.

'Will you let me walk part of the way with you?' Sidney asked abruptly.

'Certainly, if you like.'

He bade the two who remained' Good-night,' and followed Clara
downstairs.




CHAPTER IV

CLARA AND JANE

Rain no longer fell, but the gusty and bitter wind still swept about
the black streets. Walking side by side without speech, Clara and her
companion left the neighbourhood of the prison, and kept a northward
direction till they reached the junction of highways where stands the
'Angel.' Here was the wonted crowd of loiterers and the press of people
waiting for tramcar or omnibus--east, west, south, or north; newsboys,
eager to get rid of their last batch, were crying as usual, 'Ech-ow!
Exteree speciul! Ech-ow! Steendard!' and a brass band was blaring out
its saddest strain of merry dance-music. The lights gleamed dismally in
rain-puddles and on the wet pavement. With the wind came whiffs of
tobacco and odours of the drinking-bar.

They crossed, and walked the length of Islington High Street, then a
short way along its continuation, Upper Street. Once or twice Clara had
barely glanced at Kirkwood, but his eyes made no reply, and his lips
were resolutely closed. She did not seem offended by this silence; on
the contrary, her face was cheerful, and she smiled to herself now and
then. One would have imagined that she found pleasure in the sombreness
of which she was the cause.

She stopped at length, and said:

'I suppose you don't want to go in with me?'

'No.'

'Then I'll say good-night. Thank you for coming so far out of your way.'

'I'll wait. I may as well walk back with you, if you don't mind.'

'Oh, very well. I shan't be many minutes.'

She passed on and entered the place of refreshment that was kept by
Mrs. Tubbs. Till recently it had been an ordinary eating-house or
coffee-shop; but having succeeded in obtain a license to sell strong
liquors, Mrs. Tubbs had converted the establishment into one of a more
pretentious kind. She called it 'Imperial Restaurant and Luncheon Bar.'
The front shone with vermilion paint; the interior was aflare with many
gas-jets; in the window was disposed a tempting exhibition of 'snacks'
of fish, cold roast fowls, ham-sandwiches, and the like; whilst farther
back stood a cooking-stove, whereon frizzled and vapoured a savoury
mess of sausages and onions.

Sidney turned away a few paces. The inclemency of the night made Upper
Street--the promenade of a great district on account of its spacious
pavement--less frequented than usual; but there were still numbers of
people about, some hastening homewards, some sauntering hither and
thither in the familiar way, some gathered into gossiping groups.
Kirkwood was irritated by the conversation and laughter that fell on
his ears, irritated by the distant strains of the band, irritated above
all by the fume of frying that pervaded the air for many yards about
Mrs. Tubbs's precincts. He observed that the customers tending that way
were numerous. They consisted mainly of lads and young men who had come
forth from neighbouring places of entertainment. The locality and its
characteristics had been familiar to him from youth upwards; but his
nature was not subdued to what it worked in, and the present fit of
disgust was only an accentuation of a mood by which he was often
possessed. To the Hewetts he had spoken impartially of Mrs. Tubbs and
her bar; probably that was the right view; but now there came back upon
him the repugnance with which he had regarded Clara's proposal when it
was first made.

It seemed to him that he had waited nearly half an hour when Clara came
forth again. In silence she walked on beside him. Again they crossed by
the 'Angel' and entered St. John Street Road.

'You've made your arrangements?' Sidney said, now that there were few
people passing.

'Yes; I shall go on Monday.'

'You're going to live there altogether?'

'Yes; it'll be more convenient, and then it'll give them more room at
home. Bob can sleep with the children, and save money.'

'To be sure!' observed the young man with bitter irony.

Clara flashed a glance at him. It was a new thing for Sidney to take
this tone with her; not seldom he had expressed unfavourable judgments
by silence, but he had never spoken to her otherwise than with
deference and gentleness.

'You don't seem in a very good temper to-night, Mr. Kirkwood.' she
remarked in a suave tone.

He disregarded her words, but in a few moments turned upon her and said
scornfully:

'I hope you'll enjoy the pleasant, ladylike work you've found! I should
think it'll improve your self-respect to wait on the gentlemen of Upper
Street!'

Irony is not a weapon much in use among working people; their wits in
general are too slow. With Sidney, however, it had always been a habit
of speech in indignant criticism, and sympathy made him aware that
nothing would sting Clara more acutely. He saw that he was successful
when she turned her head away and moved it nervously.

'And do you suppose I go there because the place pleases me?' she asked
in a cold, hostile voice. 'You make a great mistake, as you always do
when you pretend to know anything about me. Wait till I've learned a
little about the business; you won't find me in Upper Street then.'

'I understand.'

Again they walked on in silence. They were nearing Clerkenwell Close,
and had to pass a corner of the prison in a dark lane, where the wind
moaned drearily. The line of the high blank wall was relieved in
colourless gloom against a sky of sheer night. Opposite, the shapes of
poverty-eaten houses and grimy workshops stood huddling in the
obscurity. From near at hand came shrill voices of children chasing
each other about--children playing at midnight between slum and gaol!

'We're not likely to see much of each other after to-night,' said
Sidney, stopping.

'The less the better, I should say, if this is how you're going to talk
to me.'

'The less the better, perhaps--at all events for a time. But there's
one or two things on my mind, and I'll say them now. I don't know
whether you think anything about it, but you must have seen that things
are getting worse and worse at home. Your mother--'

'She's no mother of mine!' broke in Clara angrily.

'She's been a mother to you in kindness, that's certain, and you've
repaid her almost as ill as you could have done. Another girl would
have made her hard life a bit easier. No; you've only thought of
yourself. Your father walks about day after day trying to get work, and
how do you meet him when he comes home? You fret him and anger him; you
throw him back ill-tempered words when he happens to think different
from you; you almost break his heart, because you won't give way in
things that he only means for your good--he that would give his life
for you! It's as well you should hear the truth for once, and hear it
from me, too. Anyone else might speak from all sorts of motives; as for
me, it makes me suffer more to say such things than it ever could you
to hear them. Laugh if you like! I don't ask you to pay any heed to
what _I_'ve wished and hoped; but just give a thought to your father,
and the rest of them at home. I told him to-night he'd only to trust
you, that you never could do anything to make him ashamed of you. I
said so, and I believe it. Look, Clara! with all my heart I believe it.
But now you've got your way, think of them a little.'

'It isn't your fault if I don't know how bad I am,' said the girl with
a half-smile. That she did not resent his lecture more decidedly was no
doubt due to its having afforded new proof of the power she had over
him. Sidney was shaken with emotion; his voice all but failed him at
the last.

'Good-bye,' he said, turning away.

Clara hesitated, looked at him, but finally also said 'Good-bye,' and
went on alone.

She walked with bent head, and almost passed the house-door in absence
of thought. On the threshold was standing Miss Peckover; she drew aside
to let Clara pass. Between these two was a singular rivalry. Though by
date a year younger than Clara, Clem gave no evidence of being
physically less mature. In the matter of personal charms she regarded
herself as by far Miss Hewett's superior, and resented vigorously the
tone of the latter's behaviour to her. Clara, on the other hand, looked
down upon Miss Peckover as a mere vulgar girl; she despised her brother
Bob because he' had allowed himself to be inveigled by Clem; in
intellect, in social standing, she considered herself out of all
comparison with the landlady's daughter. Clem had the obvious advantage
of being able to ridicule the Hewetts' poverty, and did so without
sparing. Now, for instance, when Clara was about to pass with a distant
'Good-night,' Clem remarked:

'It's cold, ain't it? I wonder you don't put on a ulster, a night like
this.'

'Thank you,' was the reply. 'I shan't consult you about how I'm to
dress.'

Clem laughed, knowing she had the best of the joke.

The other went upstairs, and entered the back-room, where it was quite
dark.

'That you, Clara?' asked Amy's voice. 'The candle's on the
mantel-shelf.'

'Why aren't you asleep?' Clara returned sharply. But the irritation
induced by Clem's triumph quickly passed in reflection on Sidney's mode
of leave-taking. That had not at all annoyed her, but it had made her
thoughtful. She lit the candle. Its light disclosed a room much barer
than the other one. There was one bed, in which Amy and Annie lay
(Clara had to share it with them), and a mattress placed on the floor,
where reposed little Tom; a low chest of drawers with a very small
looking-glass upon it, a washstand, a few boxes. Handsome girls,
unfortunate enough to have brains to boot, do not cultivate the patient
virtues in chambers of this description.

There was a knock at the door. Clara found her father standing there.

'Have you anything to tell me, my girl?' he asked in a subdued voice,
furtively regarding her.

'I shall go on Monday.'

He drew back a step, and seemed about to return to the other room.

'Father, I shall have to give Mrs. Tubbs the five shillings for a few
weeks. She's going to let me have a new dress.'

'Your earnin's is your own, Clara.'

'Yes; but I hope very soon to be able to give you something. It's hard
for you, having no work.'

John brightened wonderfully.

'Don't you trouble, my dear. That's all right. Things'll come round
somehow. You're a good girl. Good-night, my darlin'!'

He kissed her, and went consoled to his rest.

Miss Peckover kept going up and down between the kitchen and the
front-door. Down below, Jane was cleaning a copper kettle. Clem, who
had her sweetest morsel of cruelty yet in store, had devised this
pleasant little job as a way of keeping the child employed till all was
quiet.

She had just come down to watch the progress of the work, and to give a
smart rap or two on the toiling fingers, when a heavy footstep in the
passage caused her to dart upstairs again. It was Bob Hewett, returned
from his evening recreations.

'Oh, that's you, is it?' cried Clem. 'Come down; I want to speak to
you.'

'Wait till to-morrow,' answered Bob, advancing towards the stairs.

'Wait! we'll see about that!'

She sprang forward, and with a prompt exertion of muscle, admirable in
its way, whirled Bob round and dragged him to the head of the kitchen
flight. The young fellow took it in good part, and went down with her.

'You go up into the passage,' said Clem to her servant, and was
immediately obeyed.

'Now,' resumed Miss Peckover, when she had closed the door, 'who have
you been goin' about with to-night?'

'What are you talking about?' returned Bob, who had seated himself on
the table, and was regarding Clem jocosely. 'I've been with some pals,
that's all.'

'Pals! what sort o' pals? Do you call Pennyloaf Candy one o' your pals?'

She stood before him in a superb attitude, her head poised fiercely,
her arms quivering at her sides, all the stature and vigour of her
young body emphasised by muscular strain.

'Pennyloaf Candy!' Bob repeated, as if in scorn of the person so named.
'Get on with you! I'm sick of hearing you talk about her. Why I haven't
seen her not these three weeks.'

'It's a ---- lie!' Clem's epithet was too vigorous for reproduction.
'Sukey Jollop saw you with her down by the meat-market, an' Jeck
Bartley saw you too.'

'Jeck did?' He laughed with obstreperous scorn. 'Why, Jeck's gone to
Homerton to his mother till Saturday night. Don't be such a bloomin'
fool! Just because Suke Jollop's dead nuts on me, an' I won't have
nothin' to say to her, she goes tellin' these bloomin' lies. When I see
her next, I'll make her go down on her marrow-bones an' beg my pardon.
See if I don't just!'

There was an engaging frankness in Bob's way of defending himself which
evidently impressed Miss Peckover, though it did not immediately soothe
her irritation. She put her arms a-kimbo, and examined him with a
steady suspicion which would have disconcerted most young men. Bob,
however, only laughed more heartily. The scene was prolonged. Bob had
no recourse to tenderness to dismiss the girl's jealousy. His
self-conceit was supreme, and had always stood him in such stead with
the young ladies who, to use his own expression, were 'dead nuts on
him,' that his love-making, under whatever circumstances, always took
the form of genial banter _de haut en bas_. 'Don't be a bloomin' fool!'
was the phrase he deemed of most efficacy in softening the female
heart; and the result seemed to justify him, for after some half-hour's
wrangling, Clem abandoned her hostile attitude, and eyed him with a
savage kind of admiration.

'When are you goin' to buy me that locket, Bob, to put a bit of your
'air in?' she inquired pertinently.

'You just wait, can't you? There's a event coming off next week. I
won't say nothing, but you just wait.'

'I'm tired o' waitin'. See here; you ain't goin' to best me out of it?'

'Me best you? Don't be a bloomin' fool, Clem!'

He laughed heartily, and in a few minutes allowed himself to be
embraced and sent off to his chamber at the top of the house.

Clem summoned her servant from the passage. At the same moment there
entered another lodger, the only one whose arrival Clem still awaited.
His mode of ascending the stairs was singular; one would have imagined
that he bore some heavy weight, for he proceeded very slowly, with a
great clumping noise, surmounting one step at a time in the manner of a
child. It was Mr. Marple, the cab-driver, and his way of going up to
bed was very simply explained by the fact that a daily sixteen hours of
sitting on the box left his legs in a numb and practically useless
condition.

The house was now quiet. Clem locked the front-door and returned to the
kitchen, eager with anticipation of the jest she was going to carry
out. First of all she had to pick a quarrel with Jane; this was very
easily managed. She pretended to look about the room for a minute, then
asked fiercely:

'What's gone with that sixpence I left on the dresser?'

Jane looked up in terror. She was worn almost to the last point of
endurance by her day and night of labour and agitation. Her face was
bloodless, her eyelids were swollen with the need of sleep.

'Sixpence!' she faltered, 'I'm sure I haven't seen no sixpence, miss.'

'You haven't? Now, I've caught you at last. There's been nobody 'ere
but you. Little thief! We'll see about this in the mornin', an'
to-night _you shall sleep in the back-kitchen_!'

The child gasped for breath. The terror of sudden death could not have
exceeded that which rushed upon her heart when she was told that she
must pass her night in the room where lay the coffin.

'An' you shan't have no candle, neither,' proceeded Clem, delighted
with the effect she was producing. 'Come along! I'm off to bed, an'
I'll see you safe locked in first, so as no one can come an' hurt you.'

'Miss! please!--I can't, I durstn't!'

Jane pleaded in inarticulate anguish. But Clem had caught her by the
arm, was dragging her on, on, till she was at the very door of that
ghastly death-cellar. Though thirteen years old, her slight frame was
as incapable of resisting Clem Peckover's muscles as an infant's would
have been. The door was open, but at that moment Jane uttered a shriek
which rang and echoed through the whole house. Startled, Clem relaxed
her grasp. Jane tore herself away, fled up the kitchen stairs, fled
upwards still, flung herself at the feet of someone who had come out on
to the landing and held a light.

'Oh, help me! Don't let her! Help me!'

'What's up with you, Jane?' asked Clara, for it was she who, not being
yet in bed, had come forth at once on hearing the scream.

Jane could only cling to her garment, pant hysterically, repeat the
same words of entreaty again and again. Another door opened, and John
Hewett appeared half-dressed.

'What's wrong?' he cried. 'The 'ouse o' fire? Who yelled out like that?'

Clem was coming up; she spoke from the landing below.

'It's that Jane, just because I gave her a rap as she deserved. Send
her down again.'

'Oh, no!' cried the poor girl. 'Miss Hewett! be a friend to me! She's
goin' to shut me up all night with the coffin. Don't let her, miss! I
durstn't! Oh, be a friend to me!'

'Little liar!' shouted Clem. 'Oh, that bloomin' little liar! when I
never said a word o' such a thing!'

'I'll believe her a good deal sooner than you,' returned Clara sharply.
'Why, anybody can see she's tellin' the truth--can't they, father?
She's half-scared out of her life. Come in here, Jane; you shall stay
here till morning.'

By this time all the grown-up people in the house were on the
staircase; the clang of tongues was terrific. Clem held her ground
stoutly, and in virulence was more than a match for all her opponents.
Even Bob did not venture to take her part; he grinned down over the
banisters, and enjoyed the entertainment immensely. Dick Snape, whose
room Bob shared, took the opportunity of paying off certain old scores
he had standing against Clem. Mr. Marple, the cab-driver, was very loud
and very hoarse in condemnation of such barbarity. Mrs. Hewett, looking
as if she had herself risen from a coffin, cried shame on the general
heartlessness with which Jane was used.

Clara held to her resolve. She led Jane into the bedroom, then, with a
parting shot at Miss Peckover, herself entered and locked the door.

'Drink some water, Jane,' she said, doing her best to reassure the
child. 'You're safe for to-night, and we'll see what Mrs. Peckover says
about this when she comes back to-morrow.'

Jane looked at her rescuer with eyes in which eternal gratitude mingled
with fear for the future. She could cry now, poor thing, and so little
by little recover herself. Words to utter her thanks she had none; she
could only look something of what she felt. Clara made her undress and
lie down with little Tom on the mattress. In a quarter of an hour the
candle was extinguished, and but for the wind, which rattled sashes and
doors, and made ghostly sounds in the chimneys, there was silence
throughout the house.

Something awoke Clara before dawn. She sat up, and became aware that
Jane was talking and crying wildly, evidently re-acting in her sleep
the scene of a few hours ago. With difficulty Clara broke her slumber.

'Don't you feel well, Jane?' she asked, noticing a strangeness in the
child's way of replying to her.

'Not very, miss. My head's bad, an' I'm so thirsty. May I drink out of
the jug, miss?'

'Stay where you are. I'll bring it to you.'

Jane drank a great deal. Presently she fell again into slumber, which
was again broken in the same way. Clara did not go to sleep, and as
soon as it was daylight she summoned her father to come and look at the
child. Jane was ill, and, as everyone could see, rapidly grew worse.




CHAPTER V

JANE IS VISITED

At ten o'clock next morning Mrs. Peckover reached home. She was a tall,
big-boned woman of fifty, with an arm like a coalheaver's. She had dark
hair, which shone and was odorous with unguents; a sallow, uncomely
face, and a handsome moustache. Her countenance was more difficult to
read than Clem's; a coarse, and most likely brutal, nature was plain
enough in its lines, but there was also a suggestion of self-restraint,
of sagacity, at all events of cunning--qualities which were decidedly
not inherited by her daughter. With her came the relative whose
presence had been desired at the funeral to-day. This was Mrs. Gully, a
stout person with a very red nose and bleared eyes. The credit of the
family demanded that as many relatives as possible should follow the
hearse, and Mrs. Peckover's reason for conducting Mrs. Gully hither was
a justifiable fear lest, if she came alone, the latter would arrive in
too manifest a state of insobriety. A certain amount of stimulant had
been permitted on the way, just enough to assist a genteel loquacity,
for which Mrs. Gully had a reputation. She had given her word to
abstain from further imbibing until after the funeral.

The news which greeted her arrival was anything but welcome to Mrs.
Peckover. In the first place, there would be far more work than usual
to be performed in the house to-day, and Jane could be ill spared.
Worse than that, however, Clara Hewett, who was losing half a day's
work on Jane's account, made a very emphatic statement as to the origin
of the illness, and said that if anything happened to Jane, there would
be disagreeable facts forthcoming at a coroner's inquest. Having looked
at the sick child, Mrs. Peckover went downstairs and shut herself up
with Clem. There was a stormy interview.

'So you thought you'd have yer fling, did you, just because I wasn't
'ere? You must go makin' trouble, just to suit yer own fancies! I'll
pay you, my lady! Gr-r-r!'

Whereupon followed the smack of a large hand on a fleshy cheek, so
vigorous and unexpected a blow that even the sturdy Clem staggered back.

'You leave me alone, will you?' she roared out, her smitten cheek in a
flame. 'Do that again, an' I'll give you somethin' for yerself! See if
I don't! You just try it on!'

The room rang with uproarious abuse, with disgusting language, with the
terrific threats which are such common flowers of rhetoric in that
world, and generally mean nothing whatever. The end of it all was that
Clem went to fetch a doctor; one in whom Mrs. Peckover could repose
confidence. The man was, in fact, a druggist, with a shop in an obscure
street over towards St. Luke's; in his window was exhibited a card
which stated that a certain medical man could be consulted here daily.
The said medical man had, in fact, so much more business than he could
attend to--his name appearing in many shops--that the druggist was
deputed to act as his assistant, and was considerately supplied with
death-certificates, already signed, and only needing to be filled in
with details. Summoned by Mrs. Peckover, whose old acquaintance he was,
the druggist left the shop in care of his son, aged fifteen, and sped
to Clerkenwell Close. He made light of Jane's ailment. 'A little fever,
that was all--soon pull her round. Any wounds, by-the-by? No? Oh, soon
pull her round. Send for medicines.'

'We'll have her down in the back-kitchen as soon as the corffin's
away,' said Mrs. Peckover to Mrs. Hewett. 'Don't you upset yerself
about it, my dear; you've got quite enough to think about. Yer 'usband
got anythink yet? Dear, dear! Don't you put yerself out. I'm sure it
was a great kindness of you to let the troublesome thing lay 'ere all
night.'

Funeral guests were beginning to assemble. On arriving, they were
conducted first of all into the front-room on the ground-floor, the
Peckovers' parlour. It was richly furnished. In the centre stood a
round table, which left small space for moving about, and was at
present covered with refreshments. A polished sideboard supported a row
of dessert-plates propped on their edges, and a number of glass
vessels, probably meant for ornament alone, as they could not possibly
have been put to any use. A low cupboard in a recess was surmounted by
a frosted cardboard model of St. Paul's under a glass case, behind
which was reared an oval tray painted with flowers.. Over the
mantel-piece was the regulation mirror, its gilt frame enveloped in
coarse yellow gauze; the mantel-piece itself bore a 'wealth' of
embellishments in glass and crockery. On each side of it hung a framed
silhouette, portraits of ancestors. Other pictures there were many, the
most impressive being an ancient oil-painting, of which the canvas
bulged forth from the frame; the subject appeared to be a ship, but was
just as likely a view of the Alps. Several German prints conveyed
instruction as well as delight; one represented the trial of Strafford
in Westminster Hall; another, the trial of William Lord Russell, at the
Old Bailey. There was also a group of engraved portraits, the Royal
Family of England early in the reign of Queen Victoria; and finally,
'The Destruction of Nineveh,' by John Martin. Along the window-sill
were disposed flower-pots containing artificial plants; one or other
was always being knocked down by the curtains or blinds.

Each guest having taken a quaff of ale or spirits or what was called
wine, with perhaps a mouthful of more solid sustenance, was then led
down into the back-kitchen to view the coffin and the corpse. I mention
the coffin first, because in everyone's view this was the main point of
interest. Could Mrs. Peckover have buried the old woman in an
orange-crate, she would gladly have done so for the saving of expense;
but with relatives and neighbours to consider, she drew a great deal of
virtue out of necessity, and dealt so very handsomely with the
undertaker, that this burial would be the talk of the Close for some
weeks. The coffin was inspected inside and out, was admired and
appraised, Mrs. Peckover being at hand to check the estimates. At the
same time every most revolting detail of the dead woman's last illness
was related and discussed and mused over and exclaimed upon. 'A lovely
corpse, considerin' her years,' was the general opinion. Then all went
upstairs again, and once more refreshed themselves. The house smelt
like a bar-room.

'Everythink most respectable, I'm sure!' remarked the female mourners
to each other, as they crowded together in the parlour.

'An' so it had ought to be!' exclaimed one, in an indignant tone, such
as is reserved for the expression of offence among educated people, but
among the poor--the London poor, least original and least articulate
beings within the confines of civilisation--has also to do duty for
friendly emphasis. 'If Mrs. Peckover can't afford to do things
respectable, who can?'

And the speaker looked defiantly about her, as if daring contradiction.
But only approving murmurs replied. Mrs. Peckover had, in fact, the
reputation of being wealthy; she was always inheriting, always
accumulating what her friends called 'interess,' never expending as
other people needs must. The lodgings she let enabled her to live
rent-free and rate-free. Clem's earnings at an artificial-flower
factory more than paid for that young lady's board and clothing, and
all other outlay was not worth mentioning as a deduction from the
income created by her sundry investments. Her husband--ten years
deceased--had been a 'moulder'; he earned on an average between three
and four pounds a week, and was so prudently disposed that, for the
last decade of his life, he made it a rule never to spend a farthing of
his wages. Mrs. Peckover at that time kept a small beer-shop in Rosoman
Street--small and unpretending in appearance, but through it there ran
a beery Pactolus. By selling the business shortly after her husband's
death, Mrs. Peckover realised a handsome capital. She retired into
private life, having a strong sense of personal dignity, and feeling it
necessary to devote herself to the moral training of her only child.

At half-past eleven Mrs. Peckover was arrayed in her mourning
robes--new, dark-glistening. During her absence Clem had kept guard
over Mrs. Gully, whom it was very difficult indeed to restrain from the
bottles and decanters; the elder lady coming to relieve, Clem could
rush away and don her own solemn garments. The undertaker with his men
arrived; the hearse and coaches drove up; the Close was in a state of
excitement. 'Now that's what I call a respectable turn-out!' was the
phrase passed from mouth to mouth in the crowd gathering near the door.
Children in great numbers had absented themselves from school for the
purpose of beholding this procession. 'I do like to see spirited 'orses
at a funeral!' remarked one of the mourners, who had squeezed his way
to the parlour window. 'It puts the finishin' touch, as you may say,
don't it?' When the coffin was borne forth, there was such a press in
the street that the men with difficulty reached the hearse. As the
female mourners stepped across the pavement with handkerchiefs held to
their mouths, a sigh of satisfaction was audible throughout the crowd;
the males were less sympathetically received, and some jocose comments
from a costermonger, whose business was temporarily interrupted,
excited indulgent smiles.

The procession moved slowly away, and the crowd, unwilling to disperse
immediately, looked about for some new source of entertainment. They
were fortunate, for at this moment came round the corner an individual
notorious throughout Clerkenwell as 'Mad Jack.' Mad he presumably
was--at all events, an idiot. A lanky, raw-boned, red-beaded man,
perhaps forty years old; not clad, but hung over with the filthiest
rags; hatless, shoeless. He supported himself by singing in the
streets, generally psalms, and with eccentric modulations of the voice
which always occasioned mirth in hearers. Sometimes he stood at a
corner and began the delivery of a passage of Scripture in French; how,
where, or when he could have acquired this knowledge was a mystery, and
Jack would throw no light on his own past. At present, having watched
the funeral coaches pass away, he lifted up his voice in a terrific
blare, singing, 'All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise
Him and magnify Him for ever.' Instantly he was assailed by the
juvenile portion of the throng, was pelted with anything that came to
hand, mocked mercilessly, buffeted from behind. For a while he
persisted in his psalmody, but at length, without warning, he rushed
upon his tormentors, and with angry shrieks endeavoured to take
revenge. The uproar continued till a policeman came and cleared the
way. Then Jack went off again, singing, 'All ye works of the Lord.'
With his voice blended that of the costermonger, 'Penny a bundill!'

Up in the Hewetts' back-room lay Jane Snowdon, now seemingly asleep,
now delirious. When she talked, a name was constantly upon her lips;
she kept calling for 'Mr. Kirkwood.' Amy was at school; Annie and Tom
frequently went into the room and gazed curiously at the sick girl.
Mrs. Hewett felt so ill to-day that she could only lie on the bed and
try to silence her baby's crying.

The house-door was left wide open between the departure and return of
the mourners; a superstition of the people demands this. The Peckovers
brought back with them some half a dozen relatives and friends, invited
to a late dinner. The meal had been in preparation at an eating-house
close by, and was now speedily made ready in the parlour. A liberal
supply of various ales was furnished by the agency of a pot-boy (Jane's
absence being much felt), and in the course of half an hour or so the
company were sufficiently restored to address themselves anew to the
bottles and decanters. Mrs. Gully was now permitted to obey her
instincts; the natural result could be attributed to overstrung
feelings.

Just when the mourners had grown noisily hilarious, testifying thereby
to the respectability with which things were being conducted to the
very end, Mrs. Peckover became aware of a knocking at the front-door.
She bade her daughter go and see who it was. Clem, speedily returning,
beckoned her mother from among the guests.

'It's somebody wants to know if there ain't somebody called Snowdon
livin' 'ere,' she whispered in a tone of alarm. 'An old man.'

Mrs. Peckover never drank more than was consistent with the perfect
clearness of her brain. At present she had very red cheeks, and her
cat-like eyes gleamed noticeably, but any kind of business would have
found her as shrewdly competent as ever.

'What did you say?' she whispered savagely

'Said I'd come an' ask.'

'You stay 'ere. Don't say nothink.'

Mrs. Peckover left the room, closed the door behind her, and went along
the passage. On the doorstep stood a man with white hair, wearing an
unusual kind of cloak and a strange hat. He looked at the landlady
without speaking.

'What was you wantin', mister?'

'I have been told,' replied the man in a clear, grave voice, 'that a
child of the name of Snowdon lives in your house, ma'am.'

'Eh? Who told you that?'

'The people next door but one. I've been asking at many houses in the
neighbourhood. There used to be relations of mine lived somewhere here;
I don't know the house, nor the street exactly. The name isn't so very
common. If you don't mind, I should like to ask you who the child's
parents was.'

Mrs. Peckover's eyes were searching the speaker with the utmost
closeness.

'I don't mind tellin' you,' she said, 'that there _is_ a child of that
name in the 'ouse, a young girl, at least. Though I don't rightly know
her age, I take her for fourteen or fifteen.'

The old man seemed to consult his recollections.

'If it's anyone I'm thinking of,' he said slowly, 'she can't be quite
as old as that.'

The woman's face changed; she looked away for a moment.

'Well, as I was sayin', I don't rightly know her age. Any way, I'm
responsible for her. I've been a mother to her, an' a good
mother--though I say it myself--these six years or more. I look on her
now as a child o' my own. I don't know who you may be, mister. P'r'aps
you've come from abroad?'

'Yes, I have. There's no reason why I shouldn't tell you that I'm
trying to find any of my kin that are still alive, There was a married
son of mine that once lived somewhere about here. His name was Joseph
James Snowdon. When I last heard of him, he was working at a
'lectroplater's in Clerkenwell. That was thirteen years ago. I deal
openly with you; I shall thank you if you'll do the like with me.'

'See, will you just come in? I've got a few friends in the front-room;
there's been a death in the 'ouse, an' there's sickness, an' we're out
of order a bit, I'll ask you to come downstairs.'

It was late in the afternoon, and though lights were not yet required
in the upper rooms, the kitchen would have been all but dark save for
the fire. Mrs. Peckover lit a lamp and bade her visitor be seated. Then
she re-examined his face, his attire, his hands. Everything about him
told of a life spent in mechanical labour. His speech was that of an
untaught man, yet differed greatly from the tongue prevailing in
Clerkenwell; he was probably not a Londoner by birth, and--a point of
more moment--he expressed himself in the tone of one who is habitually
thoughtful, who, if the aid of books has been denied to him, still has
won from life the kind of knowledge which develops character. Mrs.
Peckover had small experience of faces which bear the stamp of simple
sincerity. This man's countenance put her out. As a matter of course,
he wished to overreach her in some way, but he was obviously very deep
indeed. And then she found it so difficult to guess his purposes. How
