as to recommend himself by an amiable bearing. Impossible to speak with
more engaging frankness than he did whilst strolling away from Hanover
Street in Sidney's company. Thereafter the two saw a great deal of each
other. Joseph was soon a familiar visitor in Tysoe Street; he would
come about nine o'clock of an evening, and sit till after midnight. The
staple of his talk was at first the painfully unnatural relations
existing between his father, his daughter, and himself. He had led a
most unsatisfactory life; he owned it, deplored it. That the old man
should distrust him was but natural; but would not Sidney, as a common
friend, do his best to dispel this prejudice? On the subject of his
brother Mike he kept absolute silence. The accident of meeting an
intimate acquaintance at the office of Messrs. Percival and Peel had
rendered it possible for him to pursue his inquiries in that direction
without it becoming known to Michael Snowdon that he had done anything
of the kind; and the policy he elaborated for himself demanded the
appearance of absolute disinterestedness in all his dealings with his
father. Aided by the shrewd Mrs. Peckover, he succeeded in reconciling
Clem to a present disappointment, bitter as it was, by pointing out
that there was every chance of his profiting largely upon the old man's
death, which could not be a very remote contingency. At present there
was little that could be done save to curry favour in Hanover Street,
and keep an eye on what went forward between Kirkwood and Jane. This
latter was, of course, an issue of supreme importance. A very little
observation convinced Joseph that his daughter had learned to regard
Sidney as more than a friend; whether there existed any mutual
understanding between them he could only discover by direct inquiry,
and for the present it seemed wiser to make no reference to the
subject. He preserved the attitude of one who has forfeited his natural
rights, and only seeks with humility the chance of proving that he is a
reformed character. Was, or was not, Kirkwood aware of the old man's
wealth? That too must be left uncertain, though it was more than
probable he had seen the advertisement in the newspapers, and, like
Mrs. Peckover, had based conclusions thereupon. Another possibility
was, that Kirkwood had wormed himself into Michael's complete
confidence. From Joseph's point of view, subtle machinations were
naturally attributed to the young man--whose appearance proved him
anything but a commonplace person. The situation was full of
obscurities and dangers. From Scawthorne Joseph received an assurance
that the whole of the Australian property had been capitalised and
placed in English investments; also, that the income was regularly
drawn and in some way disposed of; the manner of such disposal being
kept private between old Mr. Percival and his client.

In the meantime family discussions in the Close had brought to Joseph's
knowledge a circumstance regarding Kirkwood which interested him in a
high degree. When talking of Sidney's character, it was natural that
the Peckovers should relate the story of his relations with Clara
Hewett.

'Clara?' exclaimed Mr. Snowdon, as if struck by the name. 'Disappeared,
has she? What sort of a girl to look at?'

Clem was ready with a malicious description, whereto her husband
attended very carefully. He mused over it, and proceeded to make
inquiries about Clara's family. The Hewetts were now living in another
part of Clerkenwell, but there was no hostility between them and the
Peckovers. Was anything to be gained by keeping up intimacy with them?
Joseph, after further musing, decided that it would be just as well to
do so; suppose Clem called upon them and presented the husband of whom
she was so proud? He would like, if possible, to hear a little more
about their daughter; an idea he had--never mind exactly what. So this
call was paid, and in a few weeks Joseph had established an
acquaintance with John Hewett.

Sidney, on his part, had a difficulty in coming to definite conclusions
respecting Jane's father. Of course he was prejudiced against the man,
and though himself too little acquainted with the facts of the case to
distinguish Joseph's motives, he felt that the middle-aged prodigal's
return was anything but a fortunate event for Michael and his
granddaughter. The secret marriage with Clem was not likely, in were
not lacking grounds for hesitation in refusing to accept any case, to
have a respectable significance. True, there Joseph's account of
himself. He had a fund of natural amiability; he had a good provision
of intellect; his talk was at times very persuasive and much like that
of one who has been brought to a passable degree of honesty by the slow
development of his better instincts. But his face was against him; the
worn, sallow features, the eyes which so obviously made a struggle to
look with frankness, the vicious lower lip, awoke suspicion and told
tales of base experience such as leaves its stamp upon a man for ever.
All the more repugnant was this face to Sidney because it presented, in
certain aspects, an undeniable resemblance to Jane's; impossible to say
which feature put forth this claim of kindred, but the impression was
there, and it made Sidney turn away his eyes in disgust as often as he
perceived it. He strove, however, to behave with friendliness, for it
was Michael's desire that he should do so. That Joseph was using every
opportunity of prying into his thoughts, of learning the details of his
history, he soon became perfectly conscious; but he knew of nothing
that he need conceal.

It was impossible that Sidney should not have reflected many a time on
Michael Snowdon's position, and have been moved to curiosity by hints
of the mysterious when he thought of his friends in Hanover Street. As
it happened, he never saw those newspaper advertisements addressed to
Joseph, and his speculation had nothing whatever to support it save the
very few allusions to the past which Michael had permitted himself in
the course of talk. Plainly the old man had means sufficient for his
support, end in all likelihood this independence was connected with his
visit to Australia; but no act or word of Michael's had ever suggested
that he possessed more than a very modest competency. It was not,
indeed, the circumstances, so much as the character and views, of his
friend that set Kirkwood pondering. He did not yet know Michael
Snowdon; of that he was convinced. He had not fathomed his mind, got at
the prime motive of his being. Moreover, he felt that the old man was
waiting for some moment, or some event, to make revelation of himself.
Since Joseph's appearance, it had become more noticeable than ever that
Snowdon suffered from some agitation of the mind; Sidney had met his
eyes fixed upon him in a painful interrogation, and seemed to discern
the importunity of a desire that was refused utterance. His own
condition was affected by sympathy with this restlessness, and he could
not overcome the feeling that some decisive change was at hand for him.
Though nothing positive justified the idea, he began to connect this
anticipation of change with the holiday that was approaching, the week
to be spent in Essex at the end of July. It had been his fear that
Joseph's presence might affect these arrangements, but Michael was
evidently resolved to allow nothing of the kind. One evening, a
fortnight before the day agreed upon for leaving town, and when Joseph
had made a call in Hanover Street, the old man took occasion to speak
of the matter. Joseph accepted the information with his usual pliancy.

'I only wish my wife and me could join you,' he remarked. 'But it
wouldn't do to take a holiday so soon after settling to business.
Better luck for me next year, father, let's hope.'

That he had settled to business was a fact of which Joseph made so much
just now that one would have been tempted to suppose it almost a new
experience for him. His engagement, he declared, was with a firm of
advertising agents in the City; nothing to boast of, unfortunately, and
remunerative only in the way of commission; but he saw his way to
better things.

'Jane, my girl,' he continued, averting his eyes as if in emotion, 'I
don't know how you and me are going to show our gratitude for all this
kindness, I'm sure. I hope you haven't got so used to it that you think
there's no need to thank your grandfather?'

The girl and the old man exchanged a look. Joseph sighed, and began to
speak of another subject in a tone of cheery martyrdom.

Jane herself had not been quite so joyous as was her wont since the
occurrence that caused her to take a new view of her position in the
world. She understood that her grandfather regarded the change very
gravely, and in her own heart awoke all manner of tremulous
apprehensions when she tried to look onward a little to the
uncertainties of the future. Forecasts had not hitherto troubled her;
the present was so rich in satisfactions that she could follow the bent
of her nature and live with no anxiety concerning the unknown. It was a
great relief to her to be assured that the long-standing plans for the
holiday would suffer no change. The last week was a time of impatience,
resolutely suppressed. On the Saturday afternoon Sidney was to meet
them at Liverpool Street. Would anything happen these last few
days--this last day--this last hour? No; all three stood together on
the platform, and their holiday had already begun.

Over the pest-stricken regions of East London, sweltering in sunshine
which served only to reveal the intimacies of abomination; across miles
of a city of the damned, such as thought never conceived before this
age of ours; above streets swarming with a nameless populace, cruelly
exposed by the unwonted light of heaven; stopping at stations which it
crushes the heart to think should be the destination of any mortal; the
train made its way at length beyond the outmost limits of dread, and
entered upon a land of level meadows, of hedges and trees, of crops and
cattle. Michael Snowdon was anxious that Jane should not regard with
the carelessness of familiarity those desolate tracts from which they
were escaping. In Bethnal Green he directed her attention with a
whispered word to the view from each window, and Jane had learnt well
to understand him. But, the lesson over, it was none of his purpose to
spoil her natural mood of holiday. Sidney sat opposite her, and as
often as their eyes met a smile of contentment answered on either's
face.

They alighted at Chelmsford, and were met by the farmer in whose house
they were going to lodge, a stolid, good-natured fellow named
Pammenter, with red, leathery cheeks, and a corkscrew curl of black
hair coming forward on each temple. His trap was waiting, and in a few
minutes they started on the drive to Danbury. The distance is about
five miles, and, until Danbury Hill is reached, the countryside has no
point of interest to distinguish it from any other representative bit
of rural Essex. It is merely one of those quiet corners of flat, homely
England, where man and beast seem on good terms with each other, where
all green things grow in abundance, where from of old tilth and
pasture-land are humbly observant of seasons and alternations, where
the brown roads are familiar only with the tread of the labourer, with
the light wheel of the farmer's gig, or the rumbling of the solid warn.
By the roadside you pass occasionally a mantled pool, where perchance
ducks or geese are enjoying themselves; and at times there is a
pleasant glimpse of farm-yard, with stacks and barns and stables. All
things as simple as could be, but beautiful on this summer afternoon,
and priceless when one has come forth from the streets of Clerkenwell.

Farmer Pammenter was talkative, and his honest chest-voice sounded
pleasantly; but the matter of his discourse might have been more
cheerful. Here, as elsewhere, the evil of the times was pressing upon
men and disheartening them from labour. Farms lying barren, ill-will
between proprietor and tenant, between tenant and hind, departure of
the tillers of the soil to rot in towns that have no need of them--of
such things did honest Pammenter speak, with many a sturdy malediction
of landlords and land-laws, whereat Sidney smiled, not unsympathetic.

Danbury Hill, rising thick-wooded to the village church, which is
visible for miles around, with stretches of heath about its lower
slopes, with its far prospects over the sunny country, was the pleasant
end of a pleasant drive. Mrs. Pammenter and her children (seven of
them, unhappily) gave the party a rough, warm-hearted welcome. Ha! how
good it was to smell the rooms through which the pure air breathed
freely! All the front of the house was draped with purple clematis; in
the garden were sun-flowers and hollyhocks and lowly plants
innumerable; on the red and lichened tiles pigeons were cooing
themselves into a doze; the horse's hoofs rang with a pleasant
clearness on the stones as he was led to his cool stable. Her heart
throbbing with excess of delight, Jane pushed back the diamond-paned
casement of her bedroom, the same room she had occupied last year and
the year before, and buried her face in clematis. Then the tea that
Mrs. Pammenter had made ready;--how delicious everything tasted! how
white the cloth was! how fragrant the cut flowers in the brown jug!

But Michael had found the journey a greater tax upon his strength than
he anticipated. Whilst Sidney and Jane talked merrily over the
tea-table the old man was thinking. 'Another year they will come
without me,' and he smiled just to hide his thoughts. In the evening he
smoked his pipe on a garden-seat, for the most part silent, and at
sunset he was glad to go up to his chamber.

Jane was renewing her friendship with the Pammenters' eldest girl, an
apple-checked, red-haired, ungraceful, but good-natured lass of
sixteen. Their voices sounded from all parts of the garden and the
farm-yard, Jane's clear-throated laugh contrasting with the rougher
utterance of her companion. After supper, in the falling of the dusk,
Sidney strolled away from the gossiping circle within-doors, and found
a corner of the garden whence there was a view of wooded hillside
against the late glow of the heavens. Presently he heard footsteps, and
through the leafage of a tree that shadowed him he saw Jane looking
this way and that, as if she sought some one. Her dress was a light
calico, and she held in her hand a rough garden hat, the property of
Miss Pammenter. Sidney regarded her for some moments, then called her
by name. She could not see him at first, and looked about anxiously. He
moved a branch of the tree and again called her; whereupon she ran
forward.

'I thought perhaps you'd gone up the hill,' she said, resting her arms
on the wall by which he was standing.

Then they kept silence, enjoying the sweetness of the hour.
Differently, it is true; for Kirkwood's natural sensitiveness had been
developed and refined by studies of which Jane had no conception.
Imperfect as his instruction remained, the sources of spiritual
enjoyment were open to him, and with all his feeling there blended that
reflective bitterness which is the sad privilege of such as he. Jane's
delight was as simple as the language in which she was wont to express
herself. She felt infinitely more than Pennyloaf, for instance, would
have done under the circumstances; but her joy consisted, in the main,
of a satisfaction of pure instincts and a deep sense of gratitude to
those who made her life what it was. She could as little have
understood Sidney's mind at this moment as she could have given an
analytic account of her own sensations. For all that, the two were in
profound sympathy; how different soever the ways in which they were
affected, the result, as they stood side by side, was identical in the
hearts of both.

Sidney began to speak of Michael Snowdon, keeping his voice low, as if
in fear of breaking those subtle harmonies wherewith the night
descended.

'We must be careful not to over-tire him, He looked very pale when he
went upstairs. I've thought lately that he must suffer more than he
tells us.'

'Yes, I'm afraid he often does,' Jane assented, as if relieved to speak
of it. 'Yet he always says it's nothing to trouble about, nothing but
what is natural at his age. He's altered a great deal since father
came,' she added, regarding him diffidently.

'I hope it isn't because he thinks your father may be wanting to take
you away?'

'Oh, it can't be that! Oh, he knows I wouldn't leave him! Mr. Kirkwood,
you don't think my father will give us any trouble?'

She revealed an anxiety which delicacy of feeling had hitherto
prevented her expressing. Sidney at once spoke reassuringly, though he
had in fact no little suspicion of Joseph Snowdon's tactics.

'It's my grandfather that I ought to think most of,' pursued Jane
earnestly. 'I can't feel to my father as I do to _him_. What should I
have been now if--'

Something caused her to leave the speech unfinished, and for a few
moments there was silence. From the ground exhaled a sweet fresh odour,
soothing to the senses, and at times a breath of air brought subtler
perfume from the alleys of the garden. In the branches above them
rustled a bird's wing. At a distance on the country road sounded the
trotting of a horse.

'I feel ashamed and angry with myself,' said Sidney, in a tone of
emotion, 'when I think now of t hose times. I might have done
something, Jane. I had no right to know what you were suffering and
just go by as if it didn't matter!'

'Oh, but you didn't!' came eagerly from the girl's lips. 'You've
forgotten, but I can't. You were very kind to me--you helped me more
than you can think--you never saw me without speaking kindly. Don't you
remember that night when I came to fetch you from the workshop, and you
took off your coat and put it over me, because it was cold and raining?'

'Jane, what a long, long time ago that seems!'

'As long as I live I shall never forget it--never! You were the only
friend I had then.'

'No; there was some one else who took thought for you,' said Sidney,
regarding her gravely.

Jane met his look for an instant--they could just read each other's
features in the pale light--then dropped her eyes.

'I don't think you've forgotten that either,' he added, in the same
unusual voice.

'No,' said Jane, below her breath.

'Say who it is I mean.'

'You mean Miss Hewett,' was the reply, after a troubled moment.

'I wanted you to say her name. You remember one evening not long ago,
when your grandfather was away? I had the same wish then. Why shouldn't
we speak of her? She was a friend to you when you needed one badly, and
it's right that you should remember her with gratitude. I think of her
just like we do of people that are dead.'

Jane stood with one hand on the low wall, half-turned to him, but her
face bent downwards. Regarding her for what seemed a long time, Sidney
felt as though the fragrance of the earth and the flowers were mingling
with his blood and confusing him with emotions. At the same his tongue
was paralysed. Frequently of late he had known a timidity in Jane's
presence, which prevented him from meeting her eyes, and now this
tremor came upon him with painful intensity. He knew to what his last
words had tended; it was with consciousness of a distinct purpose that
he had led the conversation to Clara; but now he was powerless to speak
the words his heart prompted. Of a sudden he experienced a kind of
shame, the result of comparison between himself and the simple girl who
stood before him; she was so young, and the memory of passions from
which he had suffered years ago affected him with a sense of
unworthiness, almost of impurity. Jane had come to be his ideal of
maidenhood, but till this moment he had not understood the full
significance of the feeling with which he regarded her. He could not
transform with a word their relations to each other. The temptation of
the hour had hurried him towards an end which he must approach with
more thought, more preparation of himself.

It was scarcely for ten heart-beats. Then Jane raised her eyes and said
in a voice that trembled:

'I've often wished I could see her again, and thank her for her
kindness that night.'

'That will help me to think with less pain of things that are long
since over and done with,' Sidney replied, forcing himself to speak
firmly. 'We can't alter the past, Jane, but we can try to remember only
the best part of it. You, I hope, very seldom look back at all.'

'Grandfather wishes me never to forget it. He often says that.'

'Does he? I think I understand.'

Jane drew down a branch and laid the broad cool leaves against her
cheek; releasing it, she moved in the direction of the house. Her
companion followed with slow step, his head bent. Before they came to
the door Jane drew his attention to a bat that was sweeping duskily
above their heads; she began to speak with her wonted cheerfulness.

'How I should like Pennyloaf to be here! I wonder what she'd think of
it?'

At the door they bade each other good night. Sidney took yet a few
turns in the garden before entering. But that it would have seemed to
the Pammenters a crazy proceeding, he would have gladly struck away
over the fields and walked for hours.




CHAPTER XX

A VISION OF NOBLE THINGS

He slept but for an hour or two, and even then with such disturbance of
fitful dreams that he could not be said to rest. At the earliest sound
of movements in the house he rose and went out into the morning air.
There had fallen a heavy shower just after sunrise, and the glory of
the east was still partly veiled with uncertain clouds. Heedless of
weather-signs, Sidney strode away at a great pace, urged by his
ungovernable thoughts. His state was that miserable one in which a man
repeats for the thousandth time something he has said, and torments
himself with devising possible and impossible interpretations thereof.
Through the night he had done nothing but imagine what significance
Jane might have attached to his words about Clara Hewett. Why had he
spoken of Clara at all? One moment he understood his reasons, and
approved them; the next he was at a loss to account for such needless
revival of a miserable story. How had Jane interpreted him? And was it
right or wrong to have paused when on the point of confessing that he
loved her?

Rain caught him at a distance from home, and he returned to breakfast
in rather a cheerless plight. He found that Michael was not feeling
quite himself, and would not rise till midday. Jane had a look of
anxiety, and he fancied she behaved to him with a constraint hitherto
unknown. The fancy was dispelled, however, when, later in the morning,
she persuaded him to bring out his sketch-book, and suggested points of
view for a drawing of the farm that had been promised to Mr. Pammenter
Himself unable to recover the tone of calm intimacy which till
yesterday had been natural between them, Sidney found himself studying
the girl, seeking to surprise some proof that she too was no longer the
same, and only affected this unconsciousness of change. There was,
perhaps, a little less readiness in her eyes to meet his, but she
talked as naturally as ever, and the spontaneousness of her good-humour
was assuredly not feigned.

On Monday the farmer had business in Maldon. Occasionally when he drove
over to that town he took one or other of his children with him to
visit a relative, and to-day he proposed that Jane should be of the
party. They started after an early dinner. Michael and Sidney stood
together in the road, watching the vehicle as it rolled away; then they
walked in silence to a familiar spot where they could sit in shadow.
Sidney was glad of Jane's departure for the afternoon. He found it
impossible to escape the restlessness into which he had fallen, and was
resolved to seek relief by opening his mind to the old man. There could
be little doubt that Michael already understood his thoughts, and no
better opportunity for such a conversation was likely to present
itself. When they had been seated for a minute or two, neither
speaking, Sidney turned to his companion with a grave look. At the same
instant Michael also had raised his eyes and seemed on the point of
saying something of importance. They regarded each other. The old man's
face was set in an expression of profound feeling, and his lips moved
tremulously before words rose to them.

'What were you going to say, Sidney?' he asked, reading the other's
features.

'Something which I hope won't be displeasing to you. I was going to
speak of Jane. Since she has been living with you she has grown from a
child to a woman. When I was talking with her in the garden on Saturday
night I felt this change more distinctly than I had ever done before. I
understood that it had made a change in myself. I love her, Mr.
Snowdon, and it's my dearest hope that she may come to feel the same
for me.'

Michael was more agitated than the speaker; he raised a hand to his
forehead and closed his eyes as if the light pained them. But the smile
with which he speedily answered Sidney's look of trouble was full of
reassurance.

'You couldn't have said anything that would give me more pleasure,' he
replied, just above his breath. 'Does she know it? Did you speak to
her?'

'We were talking of years ago, and I mentioned Clara Hewett. I said
that I had forgotten all about her except that she'd befriended Jane.
But nothing more than that. I couldn't say what I was feeling just
then. Partly I thought that it was right to speak to you first; and
then--it seemed to me almost as if I should be treating her unfairly.
I'm so much older--she knows that it isn't the first time I--and she's
always thought of me just as a friend.'

'So much older?' repeated Michael, with a grave smile. 'Why, you're
both children to my sight. Wait and let me think a bit, Sidney. I too
have something I want to say. I'm glad you've spoken this afternoon,
when there's time for us to talk. Just wait a few minutes, and let me
think.'

Sidney had as good as forgotten that there was anything unusual in his
friend's circumstances; this last day or two he had thought of nothing
but Jane and his love for her. Now he recalled the
anticipation--originating he scarcely knew how--that some kind of
disclosure would before long be made to him. The trouble of' his mind
was heightened; he waited with all but dread for the next words.

'I think I've told you,' Michael resumed at length, steadying his
voice, 'that Joseph is my youngest son, and that I had three others.
Three others: Michael, Edward, and Robert--all dead. Edward died when
he was a boy of fifteen; Robert was killed on the railway--he was a
porter--at three-and-twenty. The eldest went out to Australia; he took
a wife there, and had one child; the wife died when they'd been married
a year or two, and Michael and his boy were drowned, both together. I
was living with them at the time, as you know. But what I've never
spoken of' Sidney, is that my son had made his fortune. He left a deal
of land, and many thousands of pounds, behind him. There was no finding
any will; a lawyer in the nearest town, a man that had known him a long
time, said he felt sure there'd been no will made. So, as things were,
the law gave everything to his father.'

He related it with subdued voice, in a solemn and agitated tone. The
effect of the news upon Sidney was a painful constriction of the heart,
a rush of confused thought, an involvement of all his perceptions in a
sense of fear. The pallor of his cheeks and the pained parting of his
lips bore witness to how little he was prepared for such a story.

'I've begun with what ought by rights to have come last,' pursued
Michael, after drawing a deep sigh. 'But it does me good to get it
told; it's been burdening me this long while. Now you must listen,
Sidney, whilst I show you why I've kept this a secret. I've no fear but
_you_'ll understand me, though most people wouldn't. It's a secret from
everybody except a lawyer in London, who does business for me; a
right-hearted man he is, in most things, and I'm glad I met with him,
but he doesn't understand me as you will; he thinks I'm making a
mistake. My son knows nothing about it; at least, it's my hope and
belief he doesn't. He told me he hadn't heard of his brother's death. I
say I hope he doesn't know; it isn't selfishness, that; I needn't tell
you. I've never for a minute thought of myself as a rich man, Sidney;
I've never thought of the money as my own, never; and if Joseph proves
himself honest, I'm ready to give up to him the share of his brother's
property that it seems to me ought to be rightly his, though the law
for some reason looks at it in a different way. I'm ready, but I must
know that he's an honest man; I must prove him first.'

The eagerness of his thought impelled him to repetitions and emphasis.
His voice fell upon a note of feebleness, and with an effort he
recovered the tone in which he had begun.

'As soon as I knew that all this wealth had fallen to me I decided at
once to come back to England. What could I do out there? I decided to
come to England, but I couldn't see farther ahead than that. I sold all
the land; I had the business done for me by that lawyer I spoke of,
that had known my son, and he recommended me to a Mr. Percival in
London. I came back, and I found little Jane, and then bit by bit I
began to understand what my duty was. It got clear in my mind; I formed
a purpose, a plan, and it's as strong in me now as ever. Let me think
again for a little, Sidney. I want to make it as plain to you as it is
to me. You'll understand me best if I go back and tell you more than I
have done yet about my life before I left England. Let me think a
while.'

He was overcome with a fear that he might not be able to convey with
sufficient force the design which had wholly possessed him. So painful
was the struggle in him between enthusiasm and a consciousness of
failing faculties, that Sidney grasped his hand and begged him to speak
simply, without effort.

'Have no fear about my understanding you. We've talked a great deal
together, and I know very well what your strongest motives are. Trust
me to sympathise with you.'

'I do! If I hadn't that trust, Sidney, I couldn't have felt the joy I
did when you spoke to me of my Jane. You'll help me to carry out my
plan; you and Jane will; you and Jane! I've got to be such an old man
all at once, as it seems, and I dursn't have waited much longer without
telling you what I had in my mind. See now, I'll go back to when I was
a boy, as far back as I can remember. You know I was born in
Clerkenwell, and I've told you a little now and then of the hard times
I went through. My poor father and mother came out of the country,
thinking to better themselves; instead of that, they found nothing but
cold and hunger, and toil and moil. They were both dead by when I was
between thirteen and fourteen. They died in the same winter--a cruel
winter. I used to go about begging bits of firewood from the
neighbours. There was a man in our house who kept dogs, and I remember
once catching hold of a bit of dirty meat--I can't call it meat--that
one of them had gnawed and left on the stairs; and I ate it, as if I'd
been a dog myself, I was that driven with hunger. Why, I feel the cold
and the hunger at this minute! It was a cruel winter, that, and it left
me alone. I had to get my own living as best I could.

'No teaching. I was nineteen before I could read the signs over shops,
or write my own name. Between nineteen and twenty I got all the
education I ever was to have, paying a man with what I could save out
of my earnings. The blessing was I had health and strength, and with
hard struggling I got into a regular employment. At five-and-twenty I
could earn my pound a week, pretty certain. When it got to five
shillings more, I must needs have a wife to share it with me. My poor
girl came to live with me in a room in Hill Street.

I've never spoken to you of her, but you shall hear it all now, cost me
what it may in the telling. Of course she was out of a poor home, and
she'd known as well as me what it was to go cold and hungry. I
sometimes think, Sidney, I can see a look of her in Jane's face--but
she was prettier than Jane; yes, yes, prettier than Jane. And to think
a man could treat a poor little thing like her the way I did!--you
don't know what sort of a man Michael Snowdon was then; no, you don't
know what I was then. You're not to think I ill-used her in the common
way; I never raised my hand, thank God! and I never spoke a word a man
should be ashamed of. But I was a hard, self-willed, stubborn fool. How
she came to like me and to marry me, I don't know; we were so different
in every way. Well, it was partly my nature and partly what I'd gone
through; we hadn't been married more than a month or two when I began
to find fault with her, and from that day on she could never please me.
I earned five-and-twenty shillings a week, and I'd made up my mind that
we must save out of it. I wouldn't let _her_ work; no, what _she_ had
to do was to keep the home on as little as possible, and always have
everything clean and straight when I got back at night. But Jenny
hadn't the same ideas about things as I had. She couldn't pinch and
pare, and our plans of saving came to nothing. It grew worse as the
children were horn. The more need there was for carefulness, the more
heedless Jenny seemed to get. And it was my fault, mine from beginning
to end. Another man would have been gentle with her and showed her
kindly when she was wrong, and have been thankful for the love she gave
him, whatever her faults. That wasn't my way. I got angry, and made her
life a burden to her. I must have things done exactly as I wished; if
not, there was no end to my fault-finding. And yet, if you'll believe
it, I loved my wife as truly as man ever did. Jenny couldn't understand
that--and how should she? At last she began to deceive me in all sorts
of little things; she got into debt with shop-people, she showed me
false accounts, she pawned things without my knowing. Last of all, she
began to drink. Our fourth child was born just at that time; Jenny had
a bad illness, and I believe it set her mind wrong. I lost all control
of her, and she used to say if it wasn't for the children she'd go and
leave me. One morning we quarrelled very badly, and I did as I'd
threatened to--I walked about the streets all the night that followed,
never coming home. I went to work next day, but at dinner-time I got
frightened and ran home just to speak a word. Little Mike, the eldest,
was playing on the stairs, and he said his mother was asleep. I went
into the room, and saw Jenny lying on the bed dressed. There was
something queer in the way her arms were stretched out. When I got near
I saw she was dead. She'd taken poison.

'And it was I had killed her, just as much as if I'd put the poison to
her lips. All because I thought myself such a wise fellow, because I'd
resolved to live more prudently than other men of my kind did. I wanted
to save money for the future--out of five-and-twenty shillings a week.
Many and many a day I starved myself to try and make up for expenses of
the home. Sidney, you remember that man we once went to hear lecture,
the man that talked of nothing but the thriftlessness of the poor, and
how it was their own fault they suffered? I was very near telling you
my story when we came away that night. Why, look; I myself was just the
kind of poor man that would have suited that lecturer. And what came of
it? If I'd let my poor Jenny go her own way from the first, we should
have had hard times now and then, but there'd have been our love to
help us, and we should have been happy enough. They talk about
thriftiness, and it just means that poor people are expected to
practise a self-denial that the rich can't even imagine, much less
carry out. You know now why this kind of talk always angers me.'

Michael brooded for a few moments, his eyes straying sadly over the
landscape before him.

'I was punished,' he continued, 'and in the fittest way. The two of my
boys who showed most love for me, Edward and Robert, died young. The
eldest and youngest were a constant trouble to me. Michael was
quick-tempered and self-willed, like myself; I took the wrong way with
him, just like I had with his mother, and there was no peace till he
left home. Joseph was still harder to deal with; but he's the only one
left alive, and there is no need to bring up things against him. With
him I wasn't to blame, unless I treated him too kindly and spoilt him.
He was my favourite, was Jo, and he repaid me cruelly. When he married,
I only heard of it from other people; we'd been parted for a long time
already. And just about then I had a letter from Michael, asking me if
I was willing to go out and live with him in Australia. I hadn't heard
from him more than two or three times in twelve years, and when this
letter came to me I was living in Sheffield; I'd been there about five
years. He wrote to say he was doing well, and that he didn't like to
think of me being left to spend my old age alone. It was a kind letter,
and it warmed my heart. Lonely I was; as lonely and sorrowful a man as
any in England. I wrote back to say that I'd come to him gladly if he
could promise to put me in the way of earning my own living. He agreed
to that, and I left the old country, little thinking I should ever see
it again. I didn't see Joseph before I went. All I knew of him was,
that he lived in Clerkenwell Close, married; and that was all I had to
guide me when I tried to find him a few years after. I was bitter
against him, and went without trying to say good-bye.

'My son's fortune seems to have been made chiefly out of horse-dealing
and what they call "land-grabbing"--buying sheep-runs over the heads of
squatters, to be bought out again at a high profit. Well, you know what
my opinion is of trading at the best, and as far as I could understand
it, it was trading at about its worst that had filled Michael's
pockets. He'd had a partner for a time, and very ugly stories were told
me about the man. However, Michael gave me as kind a welcome as his
letter promised; prosperity had done him good, and he seemed only
anxious to make up for the years of unkindness that had gone by. Had I
been willing, I might have lived under his roof at my ease; but I held
him to his bargain, and worked like any other man who goes there
without money. It's a comfort to me to think of those few years spent
in quiet and goodwill with my eldest boy. His own lad would have given
trouble, I'm afraid, if he'd lived; Michael used to talk to me uneasily
about him, poor fellow! But they both came to their end before the
world had parted them.

'If I'd been a young man, I dare say I should have felt different when
they told me how rich I was; it gave me no pleasure at first, and when
I'd had time to think about it I only grew worried. I even thought once
or twice of getting rid of the burden by giving all the money to a
hospital in Sydney or Melbourne. But then I remembered that the poor in
the old country had more claim on me, and when I'd got used to the idea
of being a wealthy man, I found myself recalling all sorts of fancies
and wishes that used to come into my head when I was working hard for a
poor living. It took some time to get all the lawyer's business
finished, and by when it was done I began to see a way before me. First
of all I must find my son in England, and see if he needed help. I
hadn't made any change in my way of living, and I came back from
Australia as a steerage passenger, wearing the same clothes that I'd
worked in. The lawyer laughed at me, but I'm sure I should have laughed
at myself if I'd dressed up as a gentleman and begun to play the fool
in my old age. The money wasn't to be used in that way. I'd got my
ideas, and they grew clearer during the voyage home.

'You know how I found Jane. Not long after, I put an advertisement in
the papers, asking my son, if he saw it, to communicate with Mr.
Percival--that's the lawyer I was recommended to in London. There was
no answer; Joseph was in America at that time. I hadn't much reason to
like Mrs. Peckover and her daughter, but I kept up acquaintance with
them because I thought they might hear of Jo some day. And after a
while I sent Jane to learn a business. Do you know why I did that? Can
you think why I brought up the child as if I'd only had just enough to
keep us both, and never gave a sign that I could have made a rich lady
of her?'

In asking the question, he bent forward and laid his hand on Sidney's
shoulder. His eyes gleamed with that light which betrays the
enthusiast, the idealist. As he approached the explanation to which his
story had tended, the signs of age and weakness disappeared before the
intensity of his feeling. Sidney understood now why he had always been
conscious of something in the man's mind that was not revealed to him,
of a life-controlling purpose but vaguely indicated by the general
tenor of Michael's opinions. The latter's fervour affected him, and he
replied with emotion:

'You wish Jane to think of this money as you do yourself--not to regard
it as wealth, but as the means of bringing help to the miserable.'

'That is my thought, Sidney. It came to me in that form whilst I was
sitting by her bed, when she was ill at Mrs. Peckover's. I knew nothing
of her character then, and the idea I had might have come to nothing
through her turning out untrustworthy. But I thought to myself: Suppose
she grows up to be a good woman--suppose I can teach her to look at
things in the same way as I do myself, train her to feel that no
happiness could be greater than the power to put an end to ever so
little of the want and wretchedness about her--suppose when I die I
could have the certainty that all this money was going to be used for
the good of the poor by a woman who herself belonged to the poor? You
understand me? It would have been easy enough to leave it among
charities in the ordinary way; but my idea went beyond that. I might
have had Jane schooled and fashioned into a lady, and still have hoped
that she would use the money well; but my idea went beyond _that_.
There's plenty of ladies nowadays taking an interest in the miserable,
and spending their means unselfishly. What I hoped was to raise up for
the poor and the untaught a friend out of their own midst, some one who
had gone through all that they _suffer_, who was accustomed to earn her
own living by the work of her hands as _they_ do, who had never thought
herself their better, who saw the world as they see it and knew all
their wants. A lady may do good, we know that; but she can't be the
friend of the poor as I understand it; there's too great a distance
between her world and theirs. Can you picture to yourself how anxiously
I've watched this child from the first day she came to live with me?
I've scarcely had a thought but about her. I saw very soon that she had
good feelings, and I set myself to encourage them. I wanted her to be
able to read and write, but there was no need of any more education
than that; it was the heart I cared about, not the mind. Besides, I had
always to keep saying to myself that perhaps, after all, she wouldn't
turn out the kind of woman I wished, and in that case she mustn't be
spoiled for an ordinary life. Sidney, it's this money that has made me
a weak old man when I might still have been as strong as many at fifty;
the care of it has worn me out; I haven't slept quietly since it came
into my hands. But the worst is over. I shan't be disappointed. Jane
will be the woman I've hoped for, and however soon my own life comes to
an end, I shall die knowing that there's a true man by her side to help
her to make my idea a reality.

'I've mentioned Mr. Percival, the lawyer. He's an old man like myself,
and we've had many a long talk together. About a year and a half ago I
told him what I've told you now. Since I came back to England he's been
managing the money for me; he's paid me the little we needed, and the
rest of the income has been used in charity by some people we could
trust. Well, Mr. Percival doesn't go with me in my plans for Jane. He
thinks I'm making a mistake, that I ought to have had the child
educated to fit her to live with rich people. It's no use; I can't get
him to feel what a grand thing it'll be for Jane to go about among her
own people and help them as nobody ever could. He said to me not long
ago, "And isn't the girl ever to have a husband?" It's my hope that she
will, I told him. "And do you suppose," he went on, "that whoever
marries her will let her live in the way you talk of? Where are you
going to find a working man that'll be content never to touch this
money--to work on for his weekly wages, when he might be living at his
ease?" And I told him that it wasn't as impossible as he thought. What
do you think, Sidney?'

The communication of a noble idea has the same effect upon the brains
of certain men--of one, let us say, in every hundred thousand--as a
wine that exalts and enraptures. As Sidney listened to the old man
telling of his wondrous vision, he became possessed with ardour such as
he had known but once or twice in his life. Idealism such as Michael
Snowdon had developed in these latter years is a form of genius; given
the susceptible hearer, it dazzles, inspires, raises to heroic contempt
of the facts of life. Had this story been related to him of some
unknown person, Sidney would have admired, but as one admires the nobly
impracticable; subject to the electric influence of a man who was great
enough to conceive and direct his life by such a project, who could
repose so supreme a faith in those he loved, all the primitive
nobleness of his character asserted itself, and he could accept with a
throbbing heart the superb challenge addressed to him.

'If Jane can think me worthy to be her husband,' he replied, 'your
friend shall see that he has feared without cause.'

'I knew it, Sidney; I knew it!' exclaimed the old man. 'How much
younger I feel now that I have shared this burden with you!'

'And shall you now tell Jane?' the other inquired.

'Not yet; not just yet. She is very young; we must wait a little. But
there can be no reason why you shouldn't speak to her--of yourself.'

Sidney was descending from the clouds. As the flush of his humanitarian
enthusiasm passed away, and he thought of his personal relations to
Jane, a misgiving, a scruple began to make itself heard within him.
Worldly and commonplace the thought, but--had he a right to ask the
girl to pledge herself to him under circumstances such as these? To be
sure, it was not as if Jane were an heiress in the ordinary way; for
all that, would it not be a proceeding of doubtful justice to woo her
when as yet she was wholly ignorant of the most important item in her
situation? His sincerity was unassailable, but--suppose, in fact, he
had to judge the conduct of another man thus placed? Upon the heated
pulsing of his blood succeeded a coolness, almost a chill; he felt as
though he had been on the verge of a precipice, and had been warned to
draw back only just in time. Every second showed him more distinctly
what his duty was. He experienced a sensation of thankfulness that he
had not spoken definitely on Saturday evening. His instinct had guided
him aright; Jane was still too young to be called upon solemnly to
decide her whole future.

'That, too, had better wait, Mr. Snowdon,' he said, after a pause of a
minute. 'I should like her to know everything before I speak to her in
that way. In a year it will be time enough.'

Michael regarded him thoughtfully.

'Perhaps you are right. I wish you knew Mr. Percival; but there is
time, there is time. He still thinks I shall be persuaded to alter my
plans. That night you came to Hanover Street and found me away, he took
me to see a lady who works among the poor in Clerkenwell; she knew me
by name, because Mr. Percival had given her money from me to use, but
we'd never seen each other till then. He wants me to ask her opinion
about Jane.'

'Has he spoken of her to the lady, do you think?'

'Oh no!' replied the other, with perfect confidence. 'He has promised
me to keep all that a secret as long as I wish. The lady--her name is
Miss Lant--seemed all that my friend said she was, and perhaps Jane
might do well to make her acquaintance some day; but that mustn't be
till Jane knows and approves the purpose of my life and hers. The one
thing that troubles me still, Sidney, is--her father. It's hard that I
can't be sure whether my son will be a help or a hindrance. I must
wait, and try to know him better.'

The conversation had so wearied Michael, that in returning to the house
he had to lean on his companion's arm. Sidney was silent, and yielded,
he scarce knew why, to a mood of depression. When Jane returned from
Maldon in the evening, and he heard her happy voice as the children ran
out to welcome her, there was a heaviness at his heart. Perhaps it came
only of hope deferred.




CHAPTER XXI

DEATH THE RECONCILER

There is no accounting for tastes. Sidney Kirkwood, spending his Sunday
evening in a garden away there in the chaw-bacon regions of Essex,
where it was so deadly quiet that you could hear the flutter of a
bird's wing or the rustle of a leaf, not once only congratulated
himself on his good fortune; yet at that hour he might have stood, as
so often, listening to the eloquence, the wit, the wisdom, that give
proud distinction to the name of Clerkenwell Green. Towards sundown,
that modern Agora rang with the voices of orators, swarmed with
listeners, with disputants, with mockers, with indifferent loungers.
The circle closing about an agnostic lecturer intersected with one
gathered for a prayer-meeting; the roar of an enthusiastic
total-abstainer blended with the shriek of a Radical politician.
Innumerable were the little groups which had broken away from the
larger ones to hold semi-private debate on matters which demanded calm
consideration and the finer intellect. From the doctrine of the Trinity
to the question of cabbage _versus_ beef; from Neo-Malthusianism to the
grievance of compulsory vaccination; not a subject which modernism has
thrown out to the multitude but here received its sufficient mauling.
Above the crowd floated wreaths of rank tobacco smoke.

Straying from circle to circle might have been seen Mr. Joseph Snowdon,
the baldness of his crown hidden by a most respectable silk hat, on one
hand a glove, in the other his walking-stick, a yellow waistcoat
enhancing his appearance of dignity, a white necktie spotted with blue
and a geranium in his button-hole correcting the suspicion of age
suggested by his countenance. As a listener to harangues of the most
various tendency, Mr. Snowdon exhibited an impartial spirit; he smiled
occasionally, but was never moved to any expression of stronger
feeling. His placid front revealed the philosopher.

Yet at length something stirred him to a more pronounced interest. He
was on the edge of a dense throng which had just been delighted by the
rhetoric of a well-known Clerkenwell Radical; the topic under
discussion was Bent, and the last speaker had, in truth, put before
them certain noteworthy views of the subject as it affected the poor of
London. What attracted Mr. Snowdon's attention was the voice of the
speaker who next rose. Pressing a little nearer, he got a glimpse of a
lean, haggard, grey-headed man, shabbily dressed, no bad example of a
sufferer from the hardships he was beginning to denounce. 'That's old
Hewett,' remarked somebody close by. 'He's the feller to let 'em 'ave
it!' Yes, it was John Hewett, much older, much more broken, yet much
fiercer than when we last saw him. Though it was evident that he spoke
often at these meetings, he had no command of his voice and no
coherence of style; after the first few words he seemed to be overcome
by rage that was little short of frenzy. Inarticulate screams and yells
interrupted the torrent of his invective; he raised both hands above
his head and clenched them in a gesture of frantic passion; his visage
was frightfully distorted, and in a few minutes there actually fell
drops of blood from his bitten lip. Rent!--it was a subject on which
the poor fellow could speak to some purpose. What was the root of the
difficulty a London workman found in making both ends meet? Wasn't it
that accursed law by which the owner of property can make him pay a
half, and often more, of his earnings or permission to put his wife and
children under a roof? And what sort of dwellings were they, these in
which the men who made the wealth of the country were born and lived
and died? What would happen to the landlords of Clerkenwell if they got
their due? Ay, what _shall_ happen, my boys, and that before so very
long? For fifteen or twenty minutes John expended his fury, until, in
fact, he was speechless. It was terrible to look at him when at length
he made his way out of the crowd; his face was livid, his eyes
bloodshot, a red slaver covered his lips and beard; you might have
taken him for a drunken man, so feebly did his limbs support him, so
shattered was he by the fit through which he had passed.

Joseph followed him, and presently walked along at his side.

'That was about as good a speech as I've heard for a long time, Mr.
Hewett,' he began by observing. 'I like to hear a man speak as if he
meant it.'

John looked up with a leaden, rheumy eye, but the compliment pleased
him, and in a moment he smiled vacantly.

'I haven't said my last word yet,' he replied, with difficulty making
himself audible through his hoarseness.

'It takes it out of you, I'm afraid. Suppose we have a drop of
something at the corner here?'

'I don't mind, Mr. Snowdon. I thought of looking in at my club for a
quarter of an hour; perhaps you'd come round with me afterwards?'

They drank at the public-house, then Hewett led the way by back streets
to the quarters of the club of which he had been for many years a
member. The locality was not cheerful, and the house itself stood in
much need of repair. As they entered, John requested his companion to
sign his name in the visitors' book; Mr. Snowdon did so with a
flourish. They ascended to the first floor and passed into a room where
little could be seen but the gas-jets, and those dimly, owing to the
fume of pipes. The rattle of bones, the strumming of a banjo, and a
voice raised at intervals in a kind of whoop announced that a nigger
entertainment was in progress. Recreation of this kind is not uncommon
on Sunday evening at the workmen's clubs; you will find it announced in
the remarkable list of lectures, &c., printed in certain Sunday
newspapers. The company which was exerting itself in the present
instance had at all events an appreciative audience; laughter and
applause broke forth very frequently.

'I'd forgot it was this kind o' thing to-night,' said Hewett, when he
could discover no vacant seat. 'Do you care about it? No more don't I;
let's go down into the readin'-room.'

Downstairs they established themselves at their ease. John ordered two
half-pints of ale--the club supplied refreshment for the body as well
as for the mind--and presently he was more himself.

'How's your wife?' inquired Joseph. 'Better, I hope?'

'I wish I could say so,' answered the other, shaking his head. 'She
hasn't been up since Thursday. She's bad, poor woman! she's bad.'

Joseph murmured his sympathy between two draughts of ale.

'Seen young Kirkwood lately?' Hewett asked, averting his eyes and
assuming a tone of half-absent indifference.

'He's gone away for his holiday; gone into Essex somewhere. When was it
he was speaking of you? Why, one day last week, to be sure.'

'Speakin' about me, eh?' said John, turning his glass round and round
on the table. And as the other remained silent, he added, 'You can tell
him, if you like, that my wife's been very bad for a long time. Him an'
me don't have nothing to say to each other--but you can tell him that,
if you like.'

'So I will,' replied Mr. Snowdon, nodding with a confidential air.

He had noticed from the beginning of his acquaintance with Hewett that
the latter showed no disinclination to receive news of Kirkwood. As
Clem's husband, Joseph was understood to be perfectly aware of the
state of things between the Hewetts and their former friend, and in a
recent conversation with Mrs. Hewett he had assured himself that she,
at all events, would be glad if the estrangement could come to an end.
For reasons of his own, Joseph gave narrow attention to these signs.

The talk was turning to other matters, when a man who had just entered
the room and stood looking about him with an uneasy expression caught
sight of Hewett and approached him. He was middle-aged, coarse of
feature, clad in the creased black which a certain type of artisan
wears on Sunday.

'I'd like a word with you, John,' he said, 'if your friend'll excuse.'

Hewett rose from the table, and they walked together to an unoccupied
spot.
