Still the same change in his manner. A little while ago he would have
chatted freely and forgotten the time.

Another week, and Jane made the acquaintance of the lady whose name we
have once or twice heard, Miss Lant, the friend of old Mr. Percival. Of
middle age and with very plain features, Miss Lant had devoted herself
to philanthropic work; she had an income of a few hundred pounds, and
lived almost as simply as the Snowdons in order to save money for
charitable expenditure. Unfortunately the earlier years of her life had
been joyless, and in the energy which she brought to this self-denying
enterprise there was just a touch of excess, common enough in those who
have been defrauded of their natural satisfactions and find a resource
in altruism. She was no pietist, but there is nowadays coming into
existence a class of persons who substitute for the old religious
acerbity a narrow and oppressive zeal for good works of purely human
sanction, and to this order Miss Lant might be said to belong. However,
nothing but what was agreeable manifested itself in her intercourse
with Michael and Jane; the former found her ardent spirit very
congenial, and the latter was soon at ease in her company.

It was a keen distress to Jane when she heard from Pennyloaf that Bob
would allow no future meetings between them. In vain she sought an
explanation; Pennyloaf professed to know nothing of her husband's
motives, but implored her friend to keep away for a time, as any
disregard of Bob's injunction would only result in worse troubles than
she yet had to endure. Jane sought the aid of Kirkwood, begging him to
interfere with young Hewett; the attempt was made, but proved
fruitless. '_Sic volo, sic jubeo_,' was Bob's standpoint, and he as
good as bade Sidney mind his own affairs.

Jane suffered, and more than she herself would have anticipated. She
had conceived a liking, almost an affection, for poor, shiftless
Pennyloaf, strengthened, of course, by the devotion with which the
latter repaid her. But something more than this injury to her feelings
was involved in her distress on being excluded from those sorry
lodgings. Pennyloaf was comparatively an old friend; she represented
the past, its contented work, its familiar associations, its abundant
happiness. And now, though Jane did not acknowledge to herself that she
regretted the old state of things, still less that she feared the
future, it was undeniable that the past seemed very bright in her
memory, and that something weighed upon her heart, forbidding such
gladsomeness as she had known.




CHAPTER XXVI

SIDNEY'S STRUGGLE

In the dreary days when autumn is being choked by the first fogs,
Sidney Kirkwood had to bestir himself and to find new lodgings. The
cheerless task came upon him just when he had already more than
sufficient trouble, and to tear himself out of the abode in which he
had spent eight years caused him more than regret; he felt
superstitiously about it, and questioned fate as to what sorrows might
be lurking for him behind this corner in life's journey. Move he must;
his landlady was dead, and the house would perhaps be vacant for a long
time. After making search about Islington one rainy evening, he found
himself at the end of Hanover Street, and was drawn to the familiar
house; not, however, to visit the Snowdons, but to redeem a promise
recently made to Bessie Byass, who declared herself vastly indignant at
the neglect with which he treated her. So, instead of going up the
steps to the front door, he descended into the area. Bessie herself
opened to him, and after a shrewd glance, made as though she would
close the door again. 'Nothing for you! The idea of beggars coming down
the area-steps. Be off!'

'I'm worse than a beggar,' replied Sidney. 'Housebreaking's more in my
line.'

And he attempted to force an entrance. Bessie struggled, but had to
give in, overcome with laughter. Samuel was enjoying a pipe in the
front kitchen; in spite of the dignity of keeping a servant (to whom
the back kitchen was sacred), Mr. and Mrs. Byass frequently spent their
evenings below stairs in the same manner as of old.

The talk began with Sidney's immediate difficulties.

'Now if it had only happened half a year ago,' said Bessie, 'I should
have got you into our first-floor rooms.'

'Shouldn't wonder if we have him there yet, some day,' remarked Sam,
winking at his wife.

'Not him,' was Bessie's rejoinder, with a meaning smile. 'He's a cool
hand, is Mr. Kirkwood. He knows how to wait. When _something_ happens,
we shall have him taking a house out at Highbury, you see if he don't.'

Sidney turned upon her with anything but a jesting look.

'What do you mean by that, Mrs. Byass?' he asked, sharply. 'When _what_
happens? What are you hinting at?'

'Bless us and save us!' cried Bessie. 'Here, Sam, he's going to swallow
me. What harm have I done?'

'Please tell me what you meant?' Sidney urged, his face expressing
strong annoyance. 'Why do you call me a "cool hand," and say that "I
know how to wait"? What did you mean? I'm serious; I want you to
explain.'

Whilst he was speaking there came a knock at the kitchen door. Bessie
cried, 'Come in,' and Jane showed herself; she glanced in a startled
way at Sidney, murmured a 'good-evening' to him, and made a request of
Bessie for some trifle she needed. Sidney, after just looking round,
kept his seat and paid no further attention to Jane, who speedily
retired.

Silence followed, and in the midst of it Kirkwood pushed his chair
impatiently.

'Bess,' cried Samuel, with an affected jocoseness, 'you're called upon
to apologise. Don't make a fool of yourself again.'

'I don't see why he need be so snappish with me,' replied his wife. 'I
beg his pardon, if he wants me.'

But Sidney was laughing now, though not in a very natural way. He put
an end to the incident, and led off into talk of quite a different
kind. When supper-time was at hand he declared that it was impossible
for him to stay. The hour had been anything but a lively one, and when
he was gone his friends discussed at length this novel display of
ill-humour on Sidney's part.

He went home muttering to himself, and passed as bad a night as he had
ever known. Two days later his removal to new lodgings was effected;
notwithstanding his desire to get into a cleaner region, he had taken a
room at the top of a house in Red Lion Street, in the densest part of
Clerkenwell, where his neighbours under the same roof were craftsmen,
carrying on their business at home.

'It'll do well enough just for a time,' he said to himself. 'Who can
say when I shall be really settled again, or whether I ever shall?'

Midway in an attempt to put his things in order, to nail his pictures
on the walls and ring forth his books again, he was seized with such
utter discouragement that he let a volume drop from his hand and threw
himself into a seat. A moan escaped his lips--'That cursed money!'

Ever since the disclosure made to him by Michael Snowdon at Danbury he
had been sensible of a grave uneasiness respecting his relations with
Jane. At the moment he might imagine himself to share the old man's
enthusiasm, or dream, or craze--whichever name were the most
appropriate--but not an hour had passed before he began to lament that
such a romance as this should envelop the life which had so linked
itself with his own. Immediately there arose in him a struggle between
the idealist tendency, of which he had his share, and stubborn everyday
sense, supported by his knowledge of the world and of his own being--a
struggle to continue for months, thwarting the natural current of his
life, racking his intellect, embittering his heart's truest emotions.
Conscious of mystery in Snowdon's affairs, he had never dreamed of such
a solution as this; the probability was--so he had thought--that
Michael received an annuity under the will of his son who died in
Australia. No word of the old man's had ever hinted at wealth in his
possession; the complaints he frequently made of the ill use to which
wealthy people put their means seemed to imply a regret that he, with
his purer purposes, had no power of doing anything. There was no
explaining the manner of Jane's bringing-up if it were not necessary
that she should be able to support herself; the idea on which Michael
acted was not such as would suggest itself, even to Sidney's mind.
Deliberately to withhold education from a girl who was to inherit any
property worth speaking of would be acting with such boldness of
originality that Sidney could not seriously have attributed it to his
friend. In fact, he did not know Michael until the revelation was made;
the depths of the man's character escaped him.

The struggle went all against idealism. It was a noble vision, that of
Michael's, but too certainly Jane Snowdon was not the person to make it
a reality; the fearful danger was, that all the possibilities of her
life might be sacrificed to a vain conscientiousness. Her character was
full of purity and sweetness and self-forgetful warmth, but it had not
the strength necessary for the carrying out of a purpose beset with
difficulties and perils. Michael, it was true, appeared to be aware of
this; it did not, however, gravely disturb him, and for the simple
reason that not to Jane alone did he look for the completion of his
design; destiny had brought him aid such as he could never have
anticipated; Jane's helpmate was at hand, in whom his trust was
unbounded.

What was in his way, that Sidney should not accept the responsibility?
Conscience from the first whispered against his doing so, and the
whisper was grown to so loud a voice that not an adverse argument could
get effective hearing. Temptations lurked for him and sprang out in
moments of his weakness, but as temptations they were at once
recognised. 'He had gone too far to retire; he would be guilty of sheer
treachery to Jane; he would break the old man's heart.' All which meant
merely that he loved the girl, and that it would be like death to part
from her. But why part? What had conscience got hold of, that it made
all this clamour? Oh, it was simple enough; Sidney not only had no
faith in the practicability of such a life's work as Michael visioned,
but he had the profoundest distrust of his own moral strength if he
should allow himself to be committed to lifelong renunciation. 'I am no
hero,' he said, 'no enthusiast. The time when my whole being could be
stirred by social questions has gone by. I am a man in love, and in
proportion as my love has strengthened, so has my old artist-self
revived in me, until now I can imagine no bliss so perfect as to marry
Jane Snowdon and go off to live with her amid fields and trees, where
no echo of the suffering world should ever reach us.' To confess this
was to make it terribly certain that sooner or later the burden of
conscientiousness would become intolerable. Not from Jane would support
come in that event; she, poor child! I would fall into miserable
perplexity, in conflict between love and duty, and her life would be
ruined.

Of course a man might have said, 'What matter how things arrange
themselves when Michael is past knowledge of them? I will marry the
woman I honestly desire, and together we will carry out this
humanitarian project so long as it be possible. When it ceases to be
so, well--.' But Sidney could not take that view. It shamed him beyond
endurance to think that he must ever avoid Jane's look, because he had
proved himself dishonest, and, what were worse, had tempted her to
become so.

The conflict between desire and scruple made every day a weariness.
Instead of looking forward eagerly to the evening in the week which he
spent with Michael and Jane, he dreaded its approach. Scarcely had he
met Jane's look since this trouble began; he knew that her voice when
she spoke to him expressed consciousness of something new in their
relations, and even whilst continuing to act his part he suffered
ceaselessly. Had Michael ever repeated to his granddaughter the
confession which Sidney would now have given anything to recall? It was
more than possible. Of Jane's feeling Sidney could not entertain a
serious doubt, and he knew that for a long time he had done his best to
encourage it. It was unpardonable to draw aloof from her just because
these circumstances had declared themselves, circumstances which
brought perplexity into her life and doubtless made her long for
another kind of support than Michael could afford her. The old man
himself appeared to be waiting anxiously; he had fallen back into his
habit of long silences, and often regarded Sidney in a way which the
latter only too well understood.

He tried to help himself through the time of indecision by saying that
there was no hurry. Jane was very young, and with the new order of
things her life had in truth only just begun. She must have a space to
look about her; all the better if she could form various acquaintances.
On that account he urged so strongly that she should be brought into
relation with Miss Lant, and, if possible, with certain of Miss Lant's
friends. All very well, had not the reasoning been utterly insincere.
It might have applied to another person; in Jane's case it was mere
sophistry. Her nature was home-keeping; to force her into alliance with
conscious philanthropists was to set her in the falsest position
conceivable; striving to mould herself to the desires of those she
loved, she would suffer patiently and in secret mourn for the time when
she had been obscure and happy. These things Sidney knew with a
certainty only less than that wherewith he judged his own sensations;
between Jane and himself the sympathy was perfect. And in despite of
scruple he would before long have obeyed the natural impulse of his
heart, had it not been that still graver complications declared
themselves, and by exasperating his over-sensitive pride made him
reckless of the pain he gave to others so long as his own self-torture
was made sufficiently acute.

With Joseph Snowdon he was doing his best to be on genial terms, but
the task was a hard one. The more he saw of Joseph, the less he liked
him. Of late the filter manufacturer had begun to strike notes in his
conversation which jarred on Sidney's sensibilities, and made him
disagreeably suspicious that something more was meant than Joseph cared
to put into plain speech. Since his establishment in business Joseph
had become remarkably attentive to his father; he appeared to enter
with much zeal into all that concerned Jane; he conversed privately
with the old man for a couple of hours at a time, and these dialogues,
for some reason or other, he made a point of reporting to Sidney.
According to these reports--and Sidney did not wholly discredit
them--Michael was coming to have a far better opinion of his son than
formerly, was even disposed to speak with him gravely of his dearest
interests.

'We talked no end about you, Sidney, last night,' said Joseph on one
occasion, with the smile, whereby he meant to express the last degree
of friendly intelligence.

And Sidney, though anxiously desiring to know the gist of the
conversation, in this instance was not gratified. He could not bring
himself to put questions, and went away in a mood of vague annoyance
which Joseph had the especial power of exciting.

With the Byasses, Joseph was forming an intimacy; of this too Sidney
became aware, and it irritated him. The exact source of this irritation
he did not at first recognise, but it was disclosed at length
unmistakably enough, and that on the occasion of the visit recently
described. Bessie's pleasantry, which roused him in so unwonted a
manner, could bear, of course, but one meaning; as soon as he heard it,
Sidney saw as in a flash that one remaining aspect of his position
which had not as yet attracted his concern. The Byasses had learnt, or
had been put in the way of surmising, that Michael Snowdon was wealthy;
instantly they passed to the reflection that in marrying Jane their old
acquaintance would be doing an excellent stroke of business. They were
coarse-minded, and Bessie could even venture to jest with him on this
detestable view of his projects. But was it not very likely that they
derived their information from Joseph Snowdon? And if so, was it not
all but certain that Joseph had suggested to them this way of regarding
Sidney himself?

So when Jane's face appeared at the door he held himself in stubborn
disregard of her. A thing impossible to him, he would have said a few
minutes ago. He revenged himself upon Jane. Good; in this way he was
likely to make noble advances.

The next evening he was due at the Snowdons', and for the very first
time he voluntarily kept away. He posted a note to say that the
business of his removal had made him irregular; he would come next
week, when things were settled once more.

Thus it came to pass that he sat wretchedly in his unfamiliar room and
groaned about 'that accursed money.' His only relief was in bursts of
anger. Why had he not the courage to go to Michael and say plainly what
he thought? 'You have formed a wild scheme, the project of a fanatic.
Its realisation would be a miracle, and in your heart you must know
that Jane's character contains no miraculous possibilities. You are
playing with people's lives, as fanatics always do. For Heaven's sake,
bestow your money on the practical folks who make a solid business of
relieving distress! Jane, I know, will bless you for making her as poor
as ever. Things are going on about you which you do not suspect. Your
son is plotting, plotting; I can see it. This money will be the cause
of endless suffering to those you really love, and will never be of as
much benefit to the unknown as if practical people dealt with it. Jane
is a simple girl, of infinite goodness; what possesses you that you
want to make her an impossible sort of social saint?' Too hard to speak
thus frankly. Michael had no longer the mental pliancy of even six
months ago; his _idea_ was everything to him; as he became weaker, it
would gain the dire force of an hallucination. And in the meantime he,
Sidney, must submit to be slandered by that fellow who had his own ends
to gain.

To marry Jane, and, at the old man's death, resign every farthing of
the money to her trustees, for charitable uses?--But the old pang of
conscience; the life-long wound to Jane's tender heart.

A day of headache and incapacity, during which it was all he could do
to attend to his mechanical work, and again the miserable loneliness of
his attic. It rained, it rained. He had half a mind to seek refuge at
some theatre, but the energy to walk so far was lacking. And whilst he
stood stupidly abstracted there came a knock at his door.

'I thought I'd just see if you'd got straight,' said Joseph Snowdon,
entering with his genial smile.

Sidney made no reply, but turned as if to stir the fire. Hands in
pockets, Joseph sauntered to a seat.

'Think you'll be comfortable here?' he went on. 'Well, well; of course
it's only temporary.'

'I don't know about that,' returned Sidney. 'I may stay here as long as
I was at the last place--eight years.'

Joseph laughed, with exceeding good-nature.

'Oh yes; I shouldn't wonder,' he said, entering into the joke.
'Still'--becoming serious--'I wish you'd found a pleasanter place. With
the winter coming on, you see--'

Sidney broke in with splenetic perversity.

'I don't know that I shall pass the winter here. My arrangements are
all temporary--all of them.'

After glancing at him the other crossed his legs and seemed to dispose
himself for a stay of some duration.

'You didn't turn up the other night--in Hanover Street.'

'No.'

'I was there. We talked about you. My father has a notion you haven't
been quite well lately. I dare say you're worrying a little, eh?'

Sidney remained standing by the fireplace, turned so that his face was
in shadow.

'Worry? Oh, I don't know,' he replied, idly.

'Well, _I'm_ worried a good deal, Sidney, and that's the fact.'

'What about?'

'All sorts of things. I've meant to have a long talk with you; but then
I don't quite know how to begin. Well, see, it's chiefly about Jane.'

Sidney neither moved nor spoke.

'After all, Sidney,' resumed the other, softening his voice, 'I _am_
her father, you see. A precious bad one I've been, that there's no
denying, and dash it if I don't sometimes feel ashamed of myself. I do
when she speaks to me in that pleasant way she has--you know what I
mean. For all that, I am her father, and I think it's only right I
should do my best to make her happy. You agree with that, I know.'

'Certainly I do.'

'You won't take it ill if I ask whether--in fact, whether you've ever
asked her--you know what I mean.'

'I have not,' Sidney replied, in a clear, unmoved tone, changing his
position at the same time so as to look his interlocutor in the face.

Joseph seemed relieved.

'Still,' he continued, 'you've given her to understand--eh? I suppose
there's no secret about that?'

'I've often spoken to her very intimately, but I have used no words
such as you are thinking of. It's quite true that my way of behaving
has meant more than ordinary friendship.'

'Yes, yes; you're not offended at me bringing this subject up, old man?
You see, I'm her father, after all, and I think we ought to understand
each other.'

'You are quite right.'

'Well, now, see.' He fidgeted a little. 'Has my father ever told you
that his friend the lawyer, Percival, altogether went against that way
of bringing up Jane?'

'Yes, I know that.'

'You do?' Joseph paused before proceeding. 'To tell you the truth, I
don't much care about Percival. I had a talk with him, you know, when
my business was being settled. No, I don't quite take to him, so to
say. Now, you won't be offended? The fact of the matter is, he asked
some rather queer questions about you--or, at all events, if they
weren't exactly questions, they--they came to the same thing.'

Sidney was beginning to glare under his brows. Commonsense told him how
very unlikely it was that a respectable solicitor should compromise
himself in talk with a stranger, and that such a man as J. J. Snowdon;
yet, whether the story were true or not, it meant that Joseph was
plotting in some vile way, and thus confirmed his suspicions. He
inquired, briefly and indifferently, what Mr. Percival's insinuations
had been.

'Well, I told you I don't much care for the fellow. He didn't say as
much, mind, but he seemed to be hinting-like that, as Jane's father, I
should do well to--to keep an eye on you--ha, ha! It came to that, I
thought--though, of course, I may have been mistaken. It shows how
little he knows about you and father. I fancy he'd got it into his head
that it was _you_ set father on those plans about Jane--though _why_
I'd like to know.'

He paused. Sidney kept his eyes down, and said nothing.

'Well, there's quite enough of that; too much. Still I thought I'd tell
you, you see. It's well to know when we've got enemies behind our
backs. But see, Sidney; to speak seriously, between ourselves.' He
leaned forward in the confidential attitude. 'You say you've gone just
a bit further than friendship with our Janey. Well, I don't know a
better man, and that's the truth--but don't you think we might put this
off for a year or two? Look now, here's this lady, Miss Lant, taking up
the girl, and it's an advantage to her; you won't deny that. I
sympathise with my good old dad; I do, honestly; but I can't help
thinking that Janey, in her position, ought to see a little of the
world. There's no secrets between _us_; you know what she'll have as
well as I do. I should be a brute if I grudged it her, after all she's
suffered from my neglect. But don't you think we might leave her free
for a year or two?'

'Yes, I agree with you.'

'You do? I thought you and I could understand each other, if we only
got really talking. Look here, Sidney; I don't mind just whispering to
you. For anything I know, Percival is saying disagreeable things to the
old man; but don't you worry about that. It don't matter a scrap, you
see, so long as you and I keep friendly, eh? I'm talking very open to
you, but it's all for Janey's sake. If you went and told father I'd
been saying anything against Percival--well, it would make things nasty
for me. I've put myself in your hands, but I know the kind of man you
are. It's only right you should hear of what's said. Don't worry; we'll
just wait a little, that's all. I mean it all for the little girl's
sake. It wouldn't be nice if you married her and then she was told--eh?'

Sidney looked at the speaker steadily, then stirred the fire and moved
about for a few moments. As he kept absolute silence, Joseph, after
throwing out a few vague assurances of goodwill and trust, rose to take
his leave. Kirkwood shook hands with him, but spoke not a word. Late
the same night Sidney penned a letter to Michael Snowdon. In the
morning he read it over, and instead of putting it into an envelope,
locked it away in one of his drawers.

When the evening for his visit to Hanover Street again came round he
again absented himself, this time just calling to leave word with the
servant that business kept him away. The business was that of walking
aimlessly about Clerkenwell, in mud and fog. About ten o'clock he came
to Farringdon Road Buildings, and with a glance up towards the Hewetts'
window he was passing by when a hand clutched at him. Turning, he saw
the face of John Hewett, painfully disturbed, strained in some wild
emotion.

'Sidney! Come this way; I want to speak to you.'

'Why, what's wrong?'

'Come over here. Sidney--I've found my girl--I've found Clara!'




CHAPTER XXVII

CLARA'S RETURN

Mrs. Eagles, a middle-aged woman of something more than average girth,
always took her time in ascending to that fifth storey where she and
her husband shared a tenement with the Hewett family. This afternoon
her pause on each landing was longer than usual, for a yellow fog,
which mocked the pale glimmer of gas-jets on the staircase, made her
gasp asthmatically. She carried, too, a heavy market-bag, having done
her Saturday purchasing earlier than of wont on account of the
intolerable weather. She reached the door at length, and being too much
exhausted to search her pocket for the latchkey, knocked for admission.
Amy Hewett opened to her, and she sank on a chair in the first room,
where the other two Hewett children were bending over 'home-lessons'
with a studiousness not altogether natural. Mrs. Eagles had a shrewd
eye; having glanced at Annie and Tom with a discreet smile, she turned
her look towards the elder girl, who was standing full in the lamplight.

'Come here, Amy,' she said after a moment's scrutiny. 'So you _will_
keep doin' that foolish thing! Very well, then, I shall have to speak
to your father about it; I'm not goin' to see you make yourself ill and
do nothing to prevent you.'

Amy, now a girl of eleven, affected much indignation.

'Why, I haven't touched a drop, Mrs. Eagles!'

'Now, now, now, now, now! Why, your lips are shrivelled up like a bit
of o' dried orange-peel! You're a silly girl, that's what you are!'

Of late Amy Hewett had become the victim of a singular propensity;
whenever she could obtain vinegar, she drank it as a toper does
spirits. Inadequate nourishment, and especially an unsatisfied palate,
frequently have this result in female children among the poor; it is an
anticipation of what will befall them as soon as they find their way to
the publichouse.

Having administered a scolding, Mrs. Eagles went into the room which
she and her husband occupied. It was so encumbered with furniture that
not more than eight or ten square feet of floor can have been available
for movement. On the bed sat Mr. Eagles, a spare, large-headed, ugly,
but very thoughtful-looking man; he and Sidney Kirkwood had been
acquaintances and fellow-workmen for some years, but no close intimacy
had arisen between them, owing to the difference of their tastes and
views. Eagles was absorbed in the study of a certain branch of
political statistics; the enthusiasm of his life was Financial Reform.
Every budget presented to Parliament he criticised with extraordinary
thoroughness, and, in fact, with an acumen which would have made him no
inefficient auxiliary of the Chancellor himself. Of course he took the
view that the nation's resources were iniquitously wasted, and of
course had little difficulty in illustrating a truth so obvious; what
distinguished him from the ordinary malcontent of Clerkenwell Green was
his logical faculty and the surprising extent of the information with
which he had furnished himself. Long before there existed a 'Financial
Reform Almanack,' Eagles practically represented that work in his own
person. Disinterested, ardent, with thoughts for but one subject in the
scope of human inquiry, he lived contentedly on his two pounds a week,
and was for ever engaged in the theoretic manipulation of millions.
Utopian budgets multiplied themselves in his brain and his note-books.
He devised imposts such as Minister never dreamt of, yet which, he
declared, could not fail of vast success. 'You just look at these
figures!' he would exclaim to Sidney, in his low, intense voice. 'There
it is in black and white!' But Sidney's faculties were quite unequal to
calculations of this kind, and Eagles could never summon resolve to
explain his schemes before an audience. Indefatigably he worked on, and
the work had to be its own reward.

He was busy in the usual way this afternoon, as he sat on the bed,
coatless, a trade journal open on his knees. His wife never disturbed
him; she was a placid, ruminative woman, generally finding the details
of her own weekly budget quite a sufficient occupation. When she had
taken off her bonnet and was turning out the contents of her bag,
Eagles remarked quietly:

'They'll have a bad journey.'

'What a day for her to be travelling all that distance, poor thing! But
perhaps it ain't so bad out o' London.'

Lowering their voices, they began to talk of John Hewett and the
daughter he was bringing from Lancashire, where she had lain in
hospital for some weeks. Of the girl and her past they knew next to
nothing, but Hewett's restricted confidences suggested disagreeable
things. The truth of the situation was, that John had received by post,
from he knew not whom, a newspaper report of the inquest held on the
body of Grace Danver, wherein, of course, was an account of what had
happened to Clara Vale; in the margin was pencilled, 'Clara Vale's real
name is Clara Hewett.' An hour after receiving this John encountered
Sidney Kirkwood. They read the report together. Before the coroner it
had been made public that the dead woman was in truth named Rudd; she
who was injured refused to give any details concerning herself, and her
history escaped the reporters. Harbouring no doubt of the information
thus mysteriously sent him--the handwriting seemed to be that of a man,
but gave no further hint as to its origin--Hewett the next day
journeyed down into Lancashire, Sidney supplying him with money. He
found Clara in a perilous condition; her face was horribly burnt with
vitriol, and the doctors could not as yet answer for the results of the
shock she had suffered. One consolation alone offered itself in the
course of Hewett's inquiries; Clara, if she recovered, would not have
lost her eyesight. The fluid had been thrown too low to effect the
worst injury; the accident of a trembling hand, of a movement on her
part, had kept her eyes untouched.

Necessity brought the father back to London almost at once, but the
news sent him at brief intervals continued to be favourable. Now that
the girl could be removed from the infirmary, there was no retreat for
her but her father's home. Mr. Peel, the manager, had made her a
present of 20_l_.--it was all he could do; the members of the company
had subscribed another 5_l_., generously enough, seeing that their tour
was come perforce to an abrupt close. Clara's career as an actress had
ended. . . .

When the fog's artificial night deepened at the close of the winter
evening, Mrs. Eagles made the Hewetts' two rooms as cheerful as might
be, expecting every moment the arrival of John and his companion. The
children were aware that an all but forgotten sister was returning to
them, and that she had been very ill; they promised quietude. Amy set
the tea-table in order, and kept the kettle ready. . . . The knock for
which they were waiting! Mrs. Eagles withdrew into her own room; Amy
went to the door.

A tall figure, so wrapped and veiled that nothing but the womanly
outline could be discerned, entered, supported by John Hewett.

'Is there a light in the other room, Amy?' John inquired in a thick
voice.

'Yes, father.'

He led the muffled form into the chamber where Amy and Annie slept. The
door closed, and for several minutes the three children stood regarding
each other, alarmed, mute. Then their father joined them. He looked
about in an absent way, slowly drew off his overcoat, and when Amy
offered to take it, bent and kissed her cheek. The girl was startled to
hear him sob and to see tears starting from his eyes. Turning suddenly
away, he stood before the fire and made a pretence of warming himself;
but his sobs overmastered him. He leaned his arms on the mantel-piece.

'Shall I pour out the tea, father?' Amy ventured to ask, when there was
again perfect silence.

'Haven't you had yours?' he replied, half-facing her.

'Not yet.'

'Get it, then--all of you. Yes, you can pour me out a cup--and put
another on the little tray. Is this stuff in the saucepan ready?' 'Mrs.
Eagles said it would be in five minutes.'.

'All right. Get on with your eatin', all of you.'

He went to Mrs. Eagles' room and talked there for a short time.
Presently Mrs. Eagles herself came out and silently removed from the
saucepan a mixture of broth and meat. Having already taken the cup of
tea to Clara, Hewett now returned to her with this food. She was
sitting by the fire, her face resting upon her hands. The lamp was
extinguished; she had said that the firelight was enough. John
deposited his burden on the table, then touched her shoulder gently and
spoke in so soft a voice that one would not have recognised it as his.

'You'll try an' eat a little, my dear? Here's somethin' as has been
made particular. After travellin'--just a spoonful or two.'

Clara expressed reluctance.

'I don't feel hungry, father. Presently, perhaps.'

'Well, well; it do want to cool a bit. Do you feel able to sit up?'

'Yes. Don't take so much trouble, father. I'd rather you left me alone.'

The tone was not exactly impatient; it spoke a weary indifference to
everything and every person.

'Yes, I'll go away, dear. But you'll eat just a bit? If you don't like
this, you must tell me, and I'll get something you could fancy.'

'It'll do well enough. I'll eat it presently; I promise you.'

John hesitated before going.

'Clara--shall you mind Amy and Annie comin' to sleep here? If you'd
rather, we'll manage it somehow else.'

'No. What does it matter? They can come when they like, only they
mustn't want me to talk to them.'

He went softly from the room, and joined the children at their tea. His
mood had grown brighter. Though in talking he kept his tone much
softened, there was a smile upon his face, and he answered freely the
questions put to him about his journey. Overcome at first by the dark
aspect of this home-coming, he now began to taste the joy of having
Clara under his roof, rescued alike from those vague dangers of the
past and from the recent peril. Impossible to separate the sorrow he
felt for her blighted life, her broken spirit, and the solace lurking
in the thought that henceforth she could not abandon him. Never a word
to reproach her for the unalterable; it should be as though there were
no gap between the old love and its renewal in the present. For Clara
used to love him, and already she had shown that his tenderness did not
appeal to her in vain; during the journey she had once or twice pressed
his hand in gratitude. How well it was that he had this home in which
to receive her! Half a year ago, and what should he have done? He would
not admit to himself that there were any difficulties ahead; if it came
to that, he would manage to get some extra work in the evening and on
Saturday afternoons. He would take Sidney into council. But thereupon
his face darkened again, and he lost himself in troubled musing.

Midway in the Sunday morning Amy told him that Clara had risen and
would like him to go and sit with her. She would not leave her room;
Amy had put it in order, and the blind was drawn low. Clara sat by the
fireside, in her attitude of last night, hiding her face as far as she
was able. The beauty of her form would have impressed anyone who
approached her, the grace of her bent head; but the countenance was no
longer that of Clara Hewett; none must now look at her, unless to pity.
Feeling herself thus utterly changed, she could not speak in her former
natural voice; her utterance was oppressed, unmusical, monotonous.

When her father had taken a place near her she asked him, 'Have you got
that piece of newspaper still?'

He had, and at her wish produced it. Clara held it in the light of the
fire, and regarded the pencilled words closely. Then she inquired if he
wished to keep it, and on his answering in the negative threw it to be
burnt. Hewett took her hand, and for a while they kept silence.

'Do you live comfortably here, father?' she said presently.

'We do, Clara. It's a bit high up, but that don't matter much.'

'You've got new furniture.'

'Yes, some new things. The old was all done for, you know.'

'And where did you live before you came here?'

'Oh, we had a place in King's Cross Road--it wasn't much of a place,
but I suppose it might a' been worse.'

'And that was where--?'

'Yes--yes--it was there.'

'And how did you manage to buy this furniture?' Clara asked, after a
pause.

'Well, my dear, to tell you the truth--it was a friend as--an old
friend helped us a bit.'

'You wouldn't care to say who it was?'

John was gravely embarrassed. Clara moved her head a little, so as to
regard him, but at once turned away, shrinkingly, when she met his eyes.

'Why don't you like to tell me, father? Was it Mr. Kirkwood?'

'Yes, my dear, it was.'

Neither spoke for a long time. Clara's head sank lower; she drew her
hand away from her father's, and used it to shield her face. When she
spoke, it was as if to herself.

'I suppose he's altered in some ways?'

'Not much; I don't see much change, myself, but then of course-- No,
he's pretty much the same.'

'He's married, isn't he?

'Married? Why, what made you think that. Clara? No, not he. He had to
move not long ago; his lodgin's is in Red Lion Street now.'

'And does he ever come here?'

'He has been--just now an' then.'

'Have you told him?'

'Why--yes, dear--I felt I had to.'

'There's no harm. You couldn't keep it a secret. But he mustn't come
whilst I'm here; you understand that, father?'

'No, no, he shan't. He shall never come, if you don't wish it.'

'Only whilst I'm here.'

'But--Clara--you'll _always_ be here.'

'Oh no! Do you think I'm going to burden you all the rest of my life? I
shall find some way of earning a living, and then I shall go and get a
room for myself.'

'Now don't--now don't talk like that!' exclaimed her father, putting
his hand on her. 'You shall do what else you like, my girl, but don't
talk about goin' away from me. That's the one thing as I couldn't bear.
I ain't so young as I was, and I've had things as was hard to go
through--I mean when the mother died and--and other things at that
time. Let you an' me stay by each other whilst we may, my girl. You
know it was always you as I thought most of, and I want to keep you by
me--I do, Clara. You won't speak about goin' away?'

She remained mute. Shadows from the firelight rose and fell upon the
walls of the half-darkened room. It was a cloudy morning; every now and
then a gust flung rain against the window.

'If you went,' he continued, huskily, 'I should be afraid myself. I
haven't told you. I didn't behave as I'd ought have done to the poor
mother, Clara; I got into drinkin' too much; yes, I did. I've broke
myself off that; but if you was to leave me--I've had hard things to go
through. Do you know the Burial Club broke up just before she died? I
couldn't get not a ha'penny! A lot o' the money was stolen. You may
think how I felt, Clara, with her lyin' there, and I hadn't got as much
as would pay for a coffin. It was Sidney Kirkwood found the money--he
did! There was never man had as good a friend as he's been to me; I
shall never have a chance of payin' what I owe him. Things is better
with me now, but I'd rather beg my bread in the streets than you should
go away. Don't be afraid, my dearest. I promise you nobody shan't come
near. You won't mind Mrs. Eagles; she's very good to the children. But
I must keep you near to me, my poor girl!'

Perhaps sit was that word of pity--though the man's shaken voice was
throughout deeply moving. For the first time since the exultant hope of
her life was blasted, Clara shed tears.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE SOUP-KITCHEN

With the first breath of winter there passes a voice half-menacing,
half-mournful, through all the barren ways and phantom-haunted refuges
of the nether world. Too quickly has vanished the brief season when the
sky is clement, when a little food suffices, and the chances of earning
that little are more numerous than at other times; this wind that gives
utterance to its familiar warning is the vaunt-courier of cold and
hunger and solicitude that knows not sleep. Will the winter be a hard
one? It is the question that concerns this world before all others,
that occupies alike the patient workfolk who have yet their home
unbroken, the strugglers foredoomed to loss of such scant needments as
the summer gifted them withal, the hopeless and the self-abandoned and
the lurking creatures of prey. To all of them the first chill breath
from a lowering sky has its voice of admonition; they set their faces;
they sigh, or whisper a prayer, or fling out a curse, each according to
his nature.

And as though the strife here were not already hard enough, behold from
many corners of the land come needy emigrants, prospectless among their
own people, fearing the dark season which has so often meant for them
the end of wages and of food, tempted hither by thought that in the
shadow of palaces work and charity are both more plentiful. Vagabonds,
too, no longer able to lie about the country roads, creep back to their
remembered lairs and join the combat for crusts flung forth by casual
hands. Day after day the stress becomes more grim. One would think that
hosts of the weaker combatants might surely find it seasonable to let
themselves be trodden out of existence, and so make room for those of
more useful sinew; somehow they cling to life; so few in comparison
yield utterly. The thoughtful in the world above look about them with
contentment when carriage-ways are deep with new-fallen snow. 'Good;
here is work for the unemployed.' Ah, if the winter did but last a few
months longer, if the wonted bounds of endurance were but, by some
freak of nature, sensibly overpassed, the carriage-ways would find
another kind of sweeping! . . .

This winter was the last that Shooter's Gardens were destined to know.
The leases had all but run out; the middlemen were garnering their
latest profits; in the spring there would come a wholesale demolition,
and model-lodgings would thereafter occupy the site. Meanwhile the
Gardens looked their surliest; the walls stood in a perpetual black
sweat; a mouldy reek came from the open doorways; the beings that
passed in and out seemed soaked with grimy moisture, puffed into
distortions, hung about with rotting garments. One such was Mrs. Candy,
Pennyloaf's mother. Her clothing consisted of a single gown and a shawl
made out of the fragments of an old counterpane; her clothing--with
exception of the shoes on her feet, those two articles were literally
all that covered her bare body. Rage for drink was with her reaching
the final mania. Useless to bestow anything upon her; straightway it or
its value passed over the counter of the beershop in Rosoman Street.
She cared only for beer, the brave, thick, medicated draught, that was
so cheap and frenzied her so speedily.

Her husband was gone for good. One choking night of November he beat
her to such purpose that she was carried off to the police-station as
dead; the man effected his escape, and was not likely to show himself
in the Gardens again. With her still lived her son Stephen, the potman.
His payment was ten shillings a week (with a daily allowance of three
pints), and he saw to it that there was always a loaf of bread in the
room they occupied together. Stephen took things with much philosophy;
his mother would, of course, drink herself to death--what was there
astonishing in that? He himself had heart disease, and surely enough
would drop down dead one of these days; the one doom was no more to be
quarrelled with than the other. Pennyloaf came to see them at very long
intervals; what was the use of making her visits more frequent? She,
too, viewed with a certain equanimity the progress of her mother's
fate. Vain every kind of interposition; worse than imprudence to give
the poor creature money or money's worth. It could only be hoped that
the end would come before very long.

An interesting house, this in which Mrs. Candy resided. It contained in
all seven rooms, and each room was the home of a family; under the roof
slept twenty-five persons, men, women, and children; the lowest rent
paid by one of these domestic groups was four-and-sixpence. You would
have enjoyed a peep into the rear chamber on the ground floor. There
dwelt a family named Hope--Mr. and Mrs. Hope, Sarah Hope, aged fifteen,
Dick Hope, aged twelve, Betsy Hope, aged three. The father was a
cripple; he and his wife occupied themselves in the picking of rags--of
course at home--and I can assure you that the atmosphere of their abode
was worthy of its aspect. Mr. Hope drank, but not desperately. His
forte was the use of language so peculiarly violent that even in
Shooter's Gardens it gained him a proud reputation. On the slightest
excuse he would threaten to brain one of his children, to disembowel
another, to gouge out the eyes of the third. He showed much ingenuity
in varying the forms of menaced punishment. Not a child in the Gardens
but was constantly threatened by its parents with a violent death; this
was so familiar that it had lost its effect; where the nurse or mother
in the upper world cries, 'I shall scold you!' in the nether the phrase
is, 'I'll knock yer 'ed orff!' To 'I shall be very angry with you' in
the one sphere, corresponds in the other, 'I'll murder you!' These are
conventions--matters of no importance. But Mr. Rope was a man of
individuality; he could make his family tremble; he could bring lodgers
about the door to listen and admire his resources.

In another room abode a mother with four children. This woman drank
moderately, but was very conscientious in despatching her three younger
children to school. True, there was just a little inconvenience in this
punctuality of hers, at all events from the youngsters' point of view,
for only on the first three days of the week had they the slightest
chance of a mouthful of breakfast before they departed. 'Never mind,
I'll have some dinner for you,' their parent was wont to say. Common
enough in the Board schools, this pursuit of knowledge on an empty
stomach. But then the end is so inestimable!

Yet another home. It was tenanted by two persons only; they appeared to
be man and wife, but in the legal sense were not so, nor did they for a
moment seek to deceive their neighbours. With the female you are
slightly acquainted; christened Sukey Jollop, she first became Mrs.
Jack Bartley, and now, for courtesy's sake, was styled Mrs. Higgs.
Sukey had strayed on to a downward path; conscious of it, she abandoned
herself to her taste for strong drink, and braved out her degradation.
Jealousy of Clem Peckover was the first cause of discord between her
and Jack Bartley; a robust young woman, she finally sent Jack about his
business by literal force of arms, and entered into an alliance with
Ned Higgs, a notorious swashbuckler, the captain of a gang of young
ruffians who at this date were giving much trouble to the Clerkenwell
police. Their speciality was the skilful use, as an offensive weapon,
of a stout leathern belt heavily buckled; Mr. Higgs boasted that with
one stroke of his belt he could, if it seemed good to him, kill his
man, but the fitting opportunity for this display of prowess had not
yet offered. . . .

Now it happened that, at the time of her making Jane Snowdon's
acquaintance, Miss Lant was particularly interested in Shooter's
Gardens and the immediate vicinity. She had associated herself with
certain ladies who undertook the control of a soup-kitchen in the
neighbourhood, and as the winter advanced she engaged Jane in this work
of charity. It was a good means, as Michael Snowdon agreed, of enabling
the girl to form acquaintances among the very poorest, those whom she
hoped to serve effectively--not with aid of money alone, but by her
personal influence. And I think it will be worth while to dwell a
little on the story of this same soup-kitchen; it is significant, and
shall take the place of abstract comment on Miss Lant's philanthropic
enterprises.

The kitchen had been doing successful work for some years; the society
which established it entrusted its practical conduct to very practical
people, a man and wife who were themselves of the nether world, and
knew the ways thereof. The 'stock' which formed the basis of the soup
was wholesome and nutritious; the peas were of excellent quality;
twopence a quart was the price at which this fluid could be purchased
(one penny if a ticket from a member of the committee were presented),
and sometimes as much as five hundred quarts would be sold in a day.
Satisfactory enough this. When the people came with complaints, saying
that they were tired of this particular soup, and would like another
kind for a change, Mr. and Mrs. Batterby, with perfect understanding of
the situation, bade their customers 'take it or leave it--an' none o'
your cheek here, or you won't get nothing at all!' The result was much
good-humour all round.

But the present year saw a change in the constitution of the committee:
two or three philanthropic ladies of great conscientiousness began to
inquire busily into the working of the soup-kitchen, and they soon
found reason to be altogether dissatisfied with Mr. and Mrs. Batterby.
No, no; these managers were of too coarse a type; they spoke grossly;
what possibility of their exerting a humanising influence on the people
to whom they dispensed soup? Soup and refinement must be disseminated
at one and the same time, over the same counter. Mr. and Mrs. Batterby
were dismissed, and quite a new order of things began. Not only were
the ladies zealous for a high ideal in the matter of soup-distributing,
they also aimed at practical economy in the use of funds. Having
engaged a cook after their own hearts, and acting upon the advice of
competent physiologists, they proceeded to make a 'stock' out of
sheep's and bullocks' heads; moreover, they ordered their peas from the
City, thus getting them at two shillings a sack less than the price
formerly paid by the Batterbys to a dealer in Clerkenwell. But, alas!
these things could not be done secretly; the story leaked out;
Shooter's Gardens and vicinity broke into the most excited feeling. I
need not tell you that the nether world will consume--when others
supply it--nothing but the very finest quality of food, that the heads
of sheep and bullocks are peculiarly offensive to its stomach, that a
saving effected on sacks of peas outrages its dearest sensibilities.
