"I suppose so. And this exception we believe to be of sterling
materials. We fancy it like ourselves; we imagine a sense of harmony. We
think his voice gives the softest, truest promise of a heart that will
never harden against us; we read in his eyes that faithful
feeling--affection. I don't think we should trust to what they call
passion at all, Caroline. I believe it is a mere fire of dry sticks,
blazing up and vanishing. But we watch him, and see him kind to animals,
to little children, to poor people. He is kind to us likewise, good,
considerate. He does not flatter women, but he is patient with them, and
he seems to be easy in their presence, and to find their company genial.
He likes them not only for vain and selfish reasons, but as _we_ like
him--because we like him. Then we observe that he is just, that he
always speaks the truth, that he is conscientious. We feel joy and peace
when he comes into a room; we feel sadness and trouble when he leaves
it. We know that this man has been a kind son, that he is a kind
brother. Will any one dare to tell me that he will not be a kind
husband?"

"My uncle would affirm it unhesitatingly. 'He will be sick of you in a
month,' he would say."

"Mrs. Pryor would seriously intimate the same."

"Mrs. Yorke and Miss Mann would darkly suggest ditto."

"If they are true oracles, it is good never to fall in love."

"Very good, if you can avoid it."

"I choose to doubt their truth."

"I am afraid that proves you are already caught."

"Not I. But if I were, do you know what soothsayers I would consult?"

"Let me hear."

"Neither man nor woman, elderly nor young: the little Irish beggar that
comes barefoot to my door; the mouse that steals out of the cranny in
the wainscot; the bird that in frost and snow pecks at my window for a
crumb; the dog that licks my hand and sits beside my knee."

"Did you ever see any one who was kind to such things?"

"Did you ever see any one whom such things seemed instinctively to
follow, like, rely on?"

"We have a black cat and an old dog at the rectory. I know somebody to
whose knee that black cat loves to climb, against whose shoulder and
cheek it likes to purr. The old dog always comes out of his kennel and
wags his tail, and whines affectionately when somebody passes."

"And what does that somebody do?"

"He quietly strokes the cat, and lets her sit while he conveniently can;
and when he must disturb her by rising, he puts her softly down, and
never flings her from him roughly. He always whistles to the dog and
gives him a caress."

"Does he? It is not Robert?"

"But it is Robert."

"Handsome fellow!" said Shirley, with enthusiasm. Her eyes sparkled.

"Is he not handsome? Has he not fine eyes and well-cut features, and a
clear, princely forehead?"

"He has all that, Caroline. Bless him! he is both graceful and good."

"I was sure you would see that he was. When I first looked at your face
I knew you would."

"I was well inclined to him before I saw him. I liked him when I did see
him. I admire him now. There is charm in beauty for itself, Caroline;
when it is blent with goodness, there is a powerful charm."

"When mind is added, Shirley?"

"Who can resist it?"

"Remember my uncle, Mesdames Pryor, Yorke, and Mann."

"Remember the croaking of the frogs of Egypt. He is a noble being. I
tell you when they _are_ good they are the lords of the creation--they
are the sons of God. Moulded in their Maker's image, the minutest spark
of His spirit lifts them almost above mortality. Indisputably, a great,
good, handsome man is the first of created things."

"Above us?"

"I would scorn to contend for empire with him--I would scorn it. Shall
my left hand dispute for precedence with my right? Shall my heart
quarrel with my pulse? Shall my veins be jealous of the blood which
fills them?"

"Men and women, husbands and wives, quarrel horribly, Shirley."

"Poor things! Poor, fallen, degenerate things! God made them for another
lot, for other feelings."

"But are we men's equals, or are we not?"

"Nothing ever charms me more than when I meet my superior--one who makes
me sincerely feel that he is my superior."

"Did you ever meet him?"

"I should be glad to see him any day. The higher above me, so much the
better. It degrades to stoop; it is glorious to look up. What frets me
is, that when I try to esteem, I am baffled; when religiously inclined,
there are but false gods to adore. I disdain to be a pagan."

"Miss Keeldar, will you come in? We are here at the rectory gates."

"Not to-day, but to-morrow I shall fetch you to spend the evening with
me. Caroline Helstone, if you really are what at present to me you seem,
you and I will suit. I have never in my whole life been able to talk to
a young lady as I have talked to you this morning. Kiss me--and
good-bye."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Pryor seemed as well disposed to cultivate Caroline's acquaintance
as Shirley. She, who went nowhere else, called on an early day at the
rectory. She came in the afternoon, when the rector happened to be out.
It was rather a close day; the heat of the weather had flushed her, and
she seemed fluttered too by the circumstance of entering a strange
house, for it appeared her habits were most retiring and secluded. When
Miss Helstone went to her in the dining-room she found her seated on the
sofa, trembling, fanning herself with her handkerchief, and seeming to
contend with a nervous discomposure that threatened to become
hysterical.

Caroline marvelled somewhat at this unusual want of self-command in a
lady of her years, and also at the lack of real strength in one who
appeared almost robust--for Mrs. Pryor hastened to allege the fatigue of
her walk, the heat of the sun, etc., as reasons for her temporary
indisposition; and still as, with more hurry than coherence, she again
and again enumerated these causes of exhaustion, Caroline gently sought
to relieve her by opening her shawl and removing her bonnet. Attentions
of this sort Mrs. Pryor would not have accepted from every one. In
general she recoiled from touch or close approach with a mixture of
embarrassment and coldness far from flattering to those who offered her
aid. To Miss Helstone's little light hand, however, she yielded
tractably, and seemed soothed by its contact. In a few minutes she
ceased to tremble, and grew quiet and tranquil.

Her usual manner being resumed, she proceeded to talk of ordinary
topics. In a miscellaneous company Mrs. Pryor rarely opened her lips,
or, if obliged to speak, she spoke under restraint, and consequently not
well; in dialogue she was a good converser. Her language, always a
little formal, was well chosen; her sentiments were just; her
information was varied and correct. Caroline felt it pleasant to listen
to her, more pleasant than she could have anticipated.

On the wall opposite the sofa where they sat hung three pictures--the
centre one, above the mantelpiece, that of a lady; the two others, male
portraits.

"That is a beautiful face," said Mrs. Pryor, interrupting a brief pause
which had followed half an hour's animated conversation. "The features
may be termed perfect; no statuary's chisel could improve them. It is a
portrait from the life, I presume?"

"It is a portrait of Mrs. Helstone."

"Of Mrs. Matthewson Helstone? Of your uncle's wife?"

"It is, and is said to be a good likeness. Before her marriage she was
accounted the beauty of the district."

"I should say she merited the distinction. What accuracy in all the
lineaments! It is, however, a passive face. The original could not have
been what is generally termed 'a woman of spirit.'"

"I believe she was a remarkably still, silent person."

"One would scarcely have expected, my dear, that your uncle's choice
should have fallen on a partner of that description. Is he not fond of
being amused by lively chat?"

"In company he is. But he always says he could never do with a talking
wife. He must have quiet at home. You go out to gossip, he affirms; you
come home to read and reflect."

"Mrs. Matthewson lived but a few years after her marriage, I think I
have heard?"

"About five years."

"Well, my dear," pursued Mrs. Pryor, rising to go, "I trust it is
understood that you will frequently come to Fieldhead. I hope you will.
You must feel lonely here, having no female relative in the house; you
must necessarily pass much of your time in solitude."

"I am inured to it. I have grown up by myself. May I arrange your shawl
for you?"

Mrs. Pryor submitted to be assisted.

"Should you chance to require help in your studies," she said, "you may
command me."

Caroline expressed her sense of such kindness.

"I hope to have frequent conversations with you. I should wish to be of
use to you."

Again Miss Helstone returned thanks. She thought what a kind heart was
hidden under her visitor's seeming chilliness. Observing that Mrs. Pryor
again glanced with an air of interest towards the portraits, as she
walked down the room, Caroline casually explained: "The likeness that
hangs near the window, you will see, is my uncle, taken twenty years
ago; the other, to the left of the mantelpiece, is his brother James, my
father."

"They resemble each other in some measure," said Mrs. Pryor; "yet a
difference of character may be traced in the different mould of the brow
and mouth."

"What difference?" inquired Caroline, accompanying her to the door.
"James Helstone--that is, my father--is generally considered the
best-looking of the two. Strangers, I remark, always exclaim, 'What a
handsome man!' Do you think his picture handsome, Mrs. Pryor?"

"It is much softer or finer featured than that of your uncle."

"But where or what is the difference of character to which you alluded?
Tell me. I wish to see if you guess right."

"My dear, your uncle is a man of principle. His forehead and his lips
are firm, and his eye is steady."

"Well, and the other? Do not be afraid of offending me. I always like
the truth."

"Do you like the truth? It is well for you. Adhere to that
preference--never swerve thence. The other, my dear, if he had been
living now, would probably have furnished little support to his
daughter. It is, however, a graceful head--taken in youth, I should
think. My dear" (turning abruptly), "you acknowledge an inestimable
value in principle?"

"I am sure no character can have true worth without it."

"You feel what you say? You have considered the subject?"

"Often. Circumstances early forced it upon my attention."

"The lesson was not lost, then, though it came so prematurely. I suppose
the soil is not light nor stony, otherwise seed falling in that season
never would have borne fruit. My dear, do not stand in the air of the
door; you will take cold. Good-afternoon."

Miss Helstone's new acquaintance soon became of value to her: their
society was acknowledged a privilege. She found she would have been in
error indeed to have let slip this chance of relief, to have neglected
to avail herself of this happy change. A turn was thereby given to her
thoughts; a new channel was opened for them, which, diverting a few of
them at least from the one direction in which all had hitherto tended,
abated the impetuosity of their rush, and lessened the force of their
pressure on one worn-down point.

Soon she was content to spend whole days at Fieldhead, doing by turns
whatever Shirley or Mrs. Pryor wished her to do; and now one would claim
her, now the other. Nothing could be less demonstrative than the
friendship of the elder lady, but also nothing could be more vigilant,
assiduous, untiring. I have intimated that she was a peculiar personage,
and in nothing was her peculiarity more shown than in the nature of the
interest she evinced for Caroline. She watched all her movements; she
seemed as if she would have guarded all her steps. It gave her pleasure
to be applied to by Miss Helstone for advice and assistance. She yielded
her aid, when asked, with such quiet yet obvious enjoyment that Caroline
ere long took delight in depending on her.

Shirley Keeldar's complete docility with Mrs. Pryor had at first
surprised Miss Helstone, and not less the fact of the reserved
ex-governess being so much at home and at ease in the residence of her
young pupil, where she filled with such quiet independency a very
dependent post; but she soon found that it needed but to know both
ladies to comprehend fully the enigma. Every one, it seemed to her, must
like, must love, must prize Mrs. Pryor when they knew her. No matter
that she perseveringly wore old-fashioned gowns; that her speech was
formal and her manner cool; that she had twenty little ways such as
nobody else had: she was still such a stay, such a counsellor, so
truthful, so kind in her way, that, in Caroline's idea, none once
accustomed to her presence could easily afford to dispense with it.

As to dependency or humiliation, Caroline did not feel it in her
intercourse with Shirley, and why should Mrs. Pryor? The heiress was
rich--very rich--compared with her new friend: one possessed a clear
thousand a year, the other not a penny; and yet there was a safe sense
of equality experienced in her society, never known in that of the
ordinary Briarfield and Whinbury gentry.

The reason was, Shirley's head ran on other things than money and
position. She was glad to be independent as to property; by fits she was
even elated at the notion of being lady of the manor, and having tenants
and an estate. She was especially tickled with an agreeable complacency
when reminded of "all that property" down in the Hollow, "comprising an
excellent cloth-mill, dyehouse, warehouse, together with the messuage,
gardens, and outbuildings, termed Hollow's Cottage;" but her exultation
being quite undisguised was singularly inoffensive; and, for her serious
thoughts, they tended elsewhere. To admire the great, reverence the
good, and be joyous with the genial, was very much the bent of Shirley's
soul: she mused, therefore, on the means of following this bent far
oftener than she pondered on her social superiority.

In Caroline Miss Keeldar had first taken an interest because she was
quiet, retiring, looked delicate, and seemed as if she needed some one
to take care of her. Her predilection increased greatly when she
discovered that her own way of thinking and talking was understood and
responded to by this new acquaintance. She had hardly expected it. Miss
Helstone, she fancied, had too pretty a face, manners and voice too
soft, to be anything out of the common way in mind and attainments; and
she very much wondered to see the gentle features light up archly to the
reveille of a dry sally or two risked by herself; and more did she
wonder to discover the self-won knowledge treasured, and the untaught
speculations working in that girlish, curl-veiled head. Caroline's
instinct of taste, too, was like her own. Such books as Miss Keeldar had
read with the most pleasure were Miss Helstone's delight also. They held
many aversions too in common, and could have the comfort of laughing
together over works of false sentimentality and pompous pretension.

Few, Shirley conceived, men or women have the right taste in poetry, the
right sense for discriminating between what is real and what is false.
She had again and again heard very clever people pronounce this or that
passage, in this or that versifier, altogether admirable, which, when
she read, her soul refused to acknowledge as anything but cant,
flourish, and tinsel, or at the best elaborate wordiness, curious,
clever, learned, perhaps, haply even tinged with the fascinating hues of
fancy, but, God knows, as different from real poetry as the gorgeous and
massy vase of mosaic is from the little cup of pure metal; or, to give
the reader a choice of similes, as the milliner's artificial wreath is
from the fresh-gathered lily of the field.

Caroline, she found, felt the value of the true ore, and knew the
deception of the flashy dross. The minds of the two girls being toned in
harmony often chimed very sweetly together.

One evening they chanced to be alone in the oak-parlour. They had passed
a long wet day together without _ennui_. It was now on the edge of dark;
candles were not yet brought in; both, as twilight deepened, grew
meditative and silent. A western wind roared high round the hall,
driving wild clouds and stormy rain up from the far-remote ocean; all
was tempest outside the antique lattices, all deep peace within. Shirley
sat at the window, watching the rack in heaven, the mist on earth,
listening to certain notes of the gale that plained like restless
spirits--notes which, had she not been so young, gay, and healthy, would
have swept her trembling nerves like some omen, some anticipatory dirge.
In this her prime of existence and bloom of beauty they but subdued
vivacity to pensiveness. Snatches of sweet ballads haunted her ear; now
and then she sang a stanza. Her accents obeyed the fitful impulse of the
wind; they swelled as its gusts rushed on, and died as they wandered
away. Caroline, withdrawn to the farthest and darkest end of the room,
her figure just discernible by the ruby shine of the flameless fire,
was pacing to and fro, muttering to herself fragments of well-remembered
poetry. She spoke very low, but Shirley heard her; and while singing
softly, she listened. This was the strain:--

    "Obscurest night involved the sky,
       The Atlantic billows roared,
     When such a destined wretch as I,
       Washed headlong from on board,
     Of friends, of hope, of all bereft,
     His floating home for ever left."

Here the fragment stopped, because Shirley's song, erewhile somewhat
full and thrilling, had become delicately faint.

"Go on," said she.

"Then you go on too. I was only repeating 'The Castaway.'"

"I know. If you can remember it all, say it all."

And as it was nearly dark, and, after all, Miss Keeldar was no
formidable auditor, Caroline went through it. She went through it as she
should have gone through it. The wild sea, the drowning mariner, the
reluctant ship swept on in the storm, you heard were realized by her;
and more vividly was realized the heart of the poet, who did not weep
for "The Castaway," but who, in an hour of tearless anguish, traced a
semblance to his own God-abandoned misery in the fate of that
man-forsaken sailor, and cried from the depths where he struggled,--

    "No voice divine the storm allayed,
       No light propitious shone,
     When, snatched from all effectual aid,
       We perished--each alone!
     But I beneath a rougher sea,
     And whelmed in deeper gulfs than he."

"I hope William Cowper is safe and calm in heaven now," said Caroline.

"Do you pity what he suffered on earth?" asked Miss Keeldar.

"Pity him, Shirley? What can I do else? He was nearly broken-hearted
when he wrote that poem, and it almost breaks one's heart to read it.
But he found relief in writing it--I know he did; and that gift of
poetry--the most divine bestowed on man--was, I believe, granted to
allay emotions when their strength threatens harm. It seems to me,
Shirley, that nobody should write poetry to exhibit intellect or
attainment. Who cares for that sort of poetry? Who cares for
learning--who cares for fine words in poetry? And who does not care for
feeling--real feeling--however simply, even rudely expressed?"

"It seems you care for it, at all events; and certainly, in hearing that
poem, one discovers that Cowper was under an impulse strong as that of
the wind which drove the ship--an impulse which, while it would not
suffer him to stop to add ornament to a single stanza, filled him with
force to achieve the whole with consummate perfection. You managed to
recite it with a steady voice, Caroline. I wonder thereat."

"Cowper's hand did not tremble in writing the lines. Why should my voice
falter in repeating them? Depend on it, Shirley, no tear blistered the
manuscript of 'The Castaway.' I hear in it no sob of sorrow, only the
cry of despair; but, that cry uttered, I believe the deadly spasm passed
from his heart, that he wept abundantly, and was comforted."

Shirley resumed her ballad minstrelsy. Stopping short, she remarked ere
long, "One could have loved Cowper, if it were only for the sake of
having the privilege of comforting him."

"You never would have loved Cowper," rejoined Caroline promptly. "He was
not made to be loved by woman."

"What do you mean?"

"What I say. I know there is a kind of natures in the world--and very
noble, elevated natures too--whom love never comes near. You might have
sought Cowper with the intention of loving him, and you would have
looked at him, pitied him, and left him, forced away by a sense of the
impossible, the incongruous, as the crew were borne from their drowning
comrade by 'the furious blast.'"

"You may be right. Who told you this?"

"And what I say of Cowper, I should say of Rousseau. Was Rousseau ever
loved? He loved passionately; but was his passion ever returned? I am
certain, never. And if there were any female Cowpers and Rousseaus, I
should assert the same of them."

"Who told you this, I ask? Did Moore?"

"Why should anybody have told me? Have I not an instinct? Can I not
divine by analogy? Moore never talked to me either about Cowper, or
Rousseau, or love. The voice we hear in solitude told me all I know on
these subjects."

"Do you like characters of the Rousseau order, Caroline?"

"Not at all, as a whole. I sympathize intensely with certain qualities
they possess. Certain divine sparks in their nature dazzle my eyes, and
make my soul glow. Then, again, I scorn them. They are made of clay and
gold. The refuse and the ore make a mass of weakness: taken altogether,
I feel them unnatural, unhealthy, repulsive."

"I dare say I should be more tolerant of a Rousseau than you would,
Cary. Submissive and contemplative yourself, you like the stern and the
practical. By the way, you must miss that Cousin Robert of yours very
much, now that you and he never meet."

"I do."

"And he must miss you?"

"That he does not."

"I cannot imagine," pursued Shirley, who had lately got a habit of
introducing Moore's name into the conversation, even when it seemed to
have no business there--"I cannot imagine but that he was fond of you,
since he took so much notice of you, talked to you, and taught you so
much."

"He never was fond of me; he never professed to be fond of me. He took
pains to prove that he only just tolerated me."

Caroline, determined not to err on the flattering side in estimating her
cousin's regard for her, always now habitually thought of it and
mentioned it in the most scanty measure. She had her own reasons for
being less sanguine than ever in hopeful views of the future, less
indulgent to pleasurable retrospections of the past.

"Of course, then," observed Miss Keeldar, "you only just tolerated him
in return?"

"Shirley, men and women are so different; they are in such a different
position. Women have so few things to think about, men so many. You may
have a friendship for a man, while he is almost indifferent to you. Much
of what cheers your life may be dependent on him, while not a feeling or
interest of moment in his eyes may have reference to you. Robert used to
be in the habit of going to London, sometimes for a week or a fortnight
together. Well, while he was away, I found his absence a void. There
was something wanting; Briarfield was duller. Of course, I had my usual
occupations; still I missed him. As I sat by myself in the evenings, I
used to feel a strange certainty of conviction I cannot describe, that
if a magician or a genius had, at that moment, offered me Prince Ali's
tube (you remember it in the 'Arabian Nights'?), and if, with its aid, I
had been enabled to take a view of Robert--to see where he was, how
occupied--I should have learned, in a startling manner, the width of the
chasm which gaped between such as he and such as I. I knew that, however
my thoughts might adhere to him, his were effectually sundered from me."

"Caroline," demanded Miss Keeldar abruptly, "don't you wish you had a
profession--a trade?"

"I wish it fifty times a day. As it is, I often wonder what I came into
the world for. I long to have something absorbing and compulsory to fill
my head and hands and to occupy my thoughts."

"Can labour alone make a human being happy?"

"No; but it can give varieties of pain, and prevent us from breaking our
hearts with a single tyrant master-torture. Besides, successful labour
has its recompense; a vacant, weary, lonely, hopeless life has none."

"But hard labour and learned professions, they say, make women
masculine, coarse, unwomanly."

"And what does it signify whether unmarried and never-to-be-married
women are unattractive and inelegant or not? Provided only they are
decent, decorous, and neat, it is enough. The utmost which ought to be
required of old maids, in the way of appearance, is that they should not
absolutely offend men's eyes as they pass them in the street; for the
rest, they should be allowed, without too much scorn, to be as absorbed,
grave, plain-looking, and plain-dressed as they please."

"You might be an old maid yourself, Caroline, you speak so earnestly."

"I shall be one. It is my destiny. I will never marry a Malone or a
Sykes; and no one else will ever marry me."

Here fell a long pause. Shirley broke it. Again the name by which she
seemed bewitched was almost the first on her lips.

"Lina--did not Moore call you Lina sometimes?"

"Yes. It is sometimes used as the abbreviation of Caroline in his native
country."

"Well, Lina, do you remember my one day noticing an inequality in your
hair--a curl wanting on that right side--and your telling me that it was
Robert's fault, as he had once cut therefrom a long lock?"

"Yes."

"If he is, and always was, as indifferent to you as you say, why did he
steal your hair?"

"I don't know--yes, I do. It was my doing, not his. Everything of that
sort always was my doing. He was going from home--to London, as usual;
and the night before he went, I had found in his sister's workbox a lock
of black hair--a short, round curl. Hortense told me it was her
brother's, and a keepsake. He was sitting near the table. I looked at
his head. He has plenty of hair; on the temples were many such round
curls. I thought he could spare me one. I knew I should like to have it,
and I asked for it. He said, on condition that he might have his choice
of a tress from my head. So he got one of my long locks of hair, and I
got one of his short ones. I keep his, but I dare say he has lost mine.
It was my doing, and one of those silly deeds it distresses the heart
and sets the face on fire to think of; one of those small but sharp
recollections that return, lacerating your self-respect like tiny
penknives, and forcing from your lips, as you sit alone, sudden,
insane-sounding interjections."

"Caroline!"

"I _do_ think myself a fool, Shirley, in some respects; I _do_ despise
myself. But I said I would not make you my confessor, for you cannot
reciprocate foible for foible; you are not weak. How steadily you watch
me now! Turn aside your clear, strong, she-eagle eye; it is an insult to
fix it on me thus."

"What a study of character you are--weak, certainly, but not in the
sense you think!--Come in!"

This was said in answer to a tap at the door. Miss Keeldar happened to
be near it at the moment, Caroline at the other end of the room. She saw
a note put into Shirley's hands, and heard the words, "From Mr. Moore,
ma'am."

"Bring candles," said Miss Keeldar.

Caroline sat expectant.

"A communication on business," said the heiress; but when candles were
brought, she neither opened nor read it. The rector's Fanny was
presently announced, and the rector's niece went home.




CHAPTER XIII.

FURTHER COMMUNICATIONS ON BUSINESS.


In Shirley's nature prevailed at times an easy indolence. There were
periods when she took delight in perfect vacancy of hand and
eye--moments when her thoughts, her simple existence, the fact of the
world being around and heaven above her, seemed to yield her such
fullness of happiness that she did not need to lift a finger to increase
the joy. Often, after an active morning, she would spend a sunny
afternoon in lying stirless on the turf, at the foot of some tree of
friendly umbrage. No society did she need but that of Caroline, and it
sufficed if she were within call; no spectacle did she ask but that of
the deep blue sky, and such cloudlets as sailed afar and aloft across
its span; no sound but that of the bee's hum, the leaf's whisper. Her
sole book in such hours was the dim chronicle of memory or the sibyl
page of anticipation. From her young eyes fell on each volume a glorious
light to read by; round her lips at moments played a smile which
revealed glimpses of the tale or prophecy. It was not sad, not dark.
Fate had been benign to the blissful dreamer, and promised to favour her
yet again. In her past were sweet passages, in her future rosy hopes.

Yet one day when Caroline drew near to rouse her, thinking she had lain
long enough, behold, as she looked down, Shirley's cheek was wet as if
with dew; those fine eyes of hers shone humid and brimming.

"Shirley, why do _you_ cry?" asked Caroline, involuntarily laying stress
on _you_.

Miss Keeldar smiled, and turned her picturesque head towards the
questioner. "Because it pleases me mightily to cry," she said. "My heart
is both sad and glad. But why, you good, patient child--why do you not
bear me company? I only weep tears, delightful and soon wiped away; you
might weep gall, if you choose."

"Why should I weep gall?"

"Mateless, solitary bird!" was the only answer.

"And are not you too mateless, Shirley?"

"At heart--no."

"Oh! who nestles there, Shirley?"

But Shirley only laughed gaily at this question, and alertly started up.

"I have dreamed," she said, "a mere day-dream--certainly bright,
probably baseless!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Helstone was by this time free enough from illusions: she took a
sufficiently grave view of the future, and fancied she knew pretty well
how her own destiny and that of some others were tending. Yet old
associations retained their influence over her, and it was these and the
power of habit which still frequently drew her of an evening to the
field-style and the old thorn overlooking the Hollow.

One night, the night after the incident of the note, she had been at her
usual post, watching for her beacon--watching vainly: that evening no
lamp was lit. She waited till the rising of certain constellations
warned her of lateness and signed her away. In passing Fieldhead, on her
return, its moonlight beauty attracted her glance, and stayed her step
an instant. Tree and hall rose peaceful under the night sky and clear
full orb; pearly paleness gilded the building; mellow brown gloom
bosomed it round; shadows of deep green brooded above its oak-wreathed
roof. The broad pavement in front shone pale also; it gleamed as if some
spell had transformed the dark granite to glistering Parian. On the
silvery space slept two sable shadows, thrown sharply defined from two
human figures. These figures when first seen were motionless and mute;
presently they moved in harmonious step, and spoke low in harmonious
key. Earnest was the gaze that scrutinized them as they emerged from
behind the trunk of the cedar. "Is it Mrs. Pryor and Shirley?"

Certainly it is Shirley. Who else has a shape so lithe, and proud, and
graceful? And her face, too, is visible--her countenance careless and
pensive, and musing and mirthful, and mocking and tender. Not fearing
the dew, she has not covered her head; her curls are free--they veil her
neck and caress her shoulder with their tendril rings. An ornament of
gold gleams through the half-closed folds of the scarf she has wrapped
across her bust, and a large bright gem glitters on the white hand
which confines it. Yes, that is Shirley.

Her companion then is, of course, Mrs. Pryor?

Yes, if Mrs. Pryor owns six feet of stature, and if she has changed her
decent widow's weeds for masculine disguise. The figure walking at Miss
Keeldar's side is a man--a tall, young, stately man; it is her tenant,
Robert Moore.

The pair speak softly; their words are not distinguishable. To remain a
moment to gaze is not to be an eavesdropper; and as the moon shines so
clearly and their countenances are so distinctly apparent, who can
resist the attraction of such interest? Caroline, it seems, cannot, for
she lingers.

There was a time when, on summer nights, Moore had been wont to walk
with his cousin, as he was now walking with the heiress. Often had she
gone up the Hollow with him after sunset, to scent the freshness of the
earth, where a growth of fragrant herbage carpeted a certain narrow
terrace, edging a deep ravine, from whose rifted gloom was heard a sound
like the spirit of the lonely watercourse, moaning amongst its wet
stones, and between its weedy banks, and under its dark bower of alders.

"But I used to be closer to him," thought Caroline. "He felt no
obligation to treat me with homage; I needed only kindness. He used to
hold my hand; he does not touch hers. And yet Shirley is not proud where
she loves. There is no haughtiness in her aspect now, only a little in
her port--what is natural to and inseparable from her, what she retains
in her most careless as in her most guarded moments. Robert must think,
as I think, that he is at this instant looking down on a fine face; and
he must think it with a man's brain, not with mine. She has such
generous yet soft fire in her eyes. She smiles--what makes her smile so
sweet? I saw that Robert felt its beauty, and he must have felt it with
his man's heart, not with my dim woman's perceptions. They look to me
like two great happy spirits. Yonder silvered pavement reminds me of
that white shore we believe to be beyond the death-flood. They have
reached it; they walk there united. And what am I, standing here in
shadow, shrinking into concealment, my mind darker than my hiding-place?
I am one of this world, no spirit--a poor doomed mortal, who asks, in
ignorance and hopelessness, wherefore she was born, to what end she
lives; whose mind for ever runs on the question, how she shall at last
encounter, and by whom be sustained through death.

"This is the worst passage I have come to yet; still I was quite
prepared for it. I gave Robert up, and gave him up to Shirley, the first
day I heard she was come, the first moment I saw her--rich, youthful,
and lovely. She has him now. He is her lover. She is his darling. She
will be far more his darling yet when they are married. The more Robert
knows of Shirley the more his soul will cleave to her. They will both be
happy, and I do not grudge them their bliss; but I groan under my own
misery. Some of my suffering is very acute. Truly I ought not to have
been born; they should have smothered me at the first cry."

Here, Shirley stepping aside to gather a dewy flower, she and her
companion turned into a path that lay nearer the gate. Some of their
conversation became audible. Caroline would not stay to listen. She
passed away noiselessly, and the moonlight kissed the wall which her
shadow had dimmed. The reader is privileged to remain, and try what he
can make of the discourse.

"I cannot conceive why nature did not give you a bulldog's head, for you
have all a bulldog's tenacity," said Shirley.

"Not a flattering idea. Am I so ignoble?"

"And something also you have of the same animal's silent ways of going
about its work. You give no warning; you come noiselessly behind, seize
fast, and hold on."

"This is guess-work. You have witnessed no such feat on my part. In your
presence I have been no bulldog."

"Your very silence indicates your race. How little you talk in general,
yet how deeply you scheme! You are far-seeing; you are calculating."

"I know the ways of these people. I have gathered information of their
intentions. My note last night informed you that Barraclough's trial had
ended in his conviction and sentence to transportation. His associates
will plot vengeance. I shall lay my plans so as to counteract or at
least be prepared for theirs--that is all. Having now given you as clear
an explanation as I can, am I to understand that for what I propose
doing I have your approbation?"

"I shall stand by you so long as you remain on the defensive. Yes."

"Good! Without any aid--even opposed or disapproved by you--I believe I
should have acted precisely as I now intend to act, but in another
spirit. I now feel satisfied. On the whole, I relish the position."

"I dare say you do. That is evident. You relish the work which lies
before you still better than you would relish the execution of a
government order for army-cloth."

"I certainly feel it congenial."

"So would old Helstone. It is true there is a shade of difference in
your motives--many shades, perhaps. Shall I speak to Mr. Helstone? I
will, if you like."

"Act as you please. Your judgment, Miss Keeldar, will guide you
accurately. I could rely on it myself in a more difficult crisis. But I
should inform you Mr. Helstone is somewhat prejudiced against me at
present."

"I am aware--I have heard all about your differences. Depend upon it,
they will melt away. He cannot resist the temptation of an alliance
under present circumstances."

"I should be glad to have him; he is of true metal."

"I think so also."

"An old blade, and rusty somewhat, but the edge and temper still
excellent."

"Well, you shall have him, Mr. Moore--that is, if I can win him."

"Whom can you not win?"

"Perhaps not the rector; but I will make the effort."

"Effort! He will yield for a word--a smile."

"By no means. It will cost me several cups of tea, some toast and cake,
and an ample measure of remonstrances, expostulations, and persuasions.
It grows rather chill."

"I perceive you shiver. Am I acting wrongly to detain you here? Yet it
is so calm--I even feel it warm--and society such as yours is a pleasure
to me so rare. If you were wrapped in a thicker shawl----"

"I might stay longer, and forget how late it is, which would chagrin
Mrs. Pryor. We keep early and regular hours at Fieldhead, Mr. Moore; and
so, I am sure, does your sister at the cottage."

"Yes; but Hortense and I have an understanding the most convenient in
the world, that we shall each do as we please."

"How do you please to do?"

"Three nights in the week I sleep in the mill--but I require little
rest--and when it is moonlight and mild I often haunt the Hollow till
daybreak."

"When I was a very little girl, Mr. Moore, my nurse used to tell me
tales of fairies being seen in that Hollow. That was before my father
built the mill, when it was a perfectly solitary ravine. You will be
falling under enchantment."

"I fear it is done," said Moore, in a low voice.

"But there are worse things than fairies to be guarded against," pursued
Miss Keeldar.

"Things more perilous," he subjoined.

"Far more so. For instance, how would you like to meet Michael Hartley,
that mad Calvinist and Jacobin weaver? They say he is addicted to
poaching, and often goes abroad at night with his gun."

"I have already had the luck to meet him. We held a long argument
together one night. A strange little incident it was; I liked it."

"Liked it? I admire your taste! Michael is not sane. Where did you meet
him?"

"In the deepest, shadiest spot in the glen, where the water runs low,
under brushwood. We sat down near that plank bridge. It was moonlight,
but clouded, and very windy. We had a talk."

"On politics?"

"And religion. I think the moon was at the full, and Michael was as near
crazed as possible. He uttered strange blasphemy in his Antinomian
fashion."

"Excuse me, but I think you must have been nearly as mad as he, to sit
listening to him."

"There is a wild interest in his ravings. The man would be half a poet,
if he were not wholly a maniac; and perhaps a prophet, if he were not a
profligate. He solemnly informed me that hell was foreordained my
inevitable portion; that he read the mark of the beast on my brow; that
I had been an outcast from the beginning. God's vengeance, he said, was
preparing for me, and affirmed that in a vision of the night he had
beheld the manner and the instrument of my doom. I wanted to know
further, but he left me with these words, 'The end is not yet.'"

"Have you ever seen him since?"

"About a month afterwards, in returning from market, I encountered him
and Moses Barraclough, both in an advanced stage of inebriation. They
were praying in frantic sort at the roadside. They accosted me as Satan,
bid me avaunt, and clamoured to be delivered from temptation. Again, but
a few days ago, Michael took the trouble of appearing at the
counting-house door, hatless, in his shirt-sleeves--his coat and castor
having been detained at the public-house in pledge. He delivered himself
of the comfortable message that he could wish Mr. Moore to set his house
in order, as his soul was likely shortly to be required of him."

"Do you make light of these things?"

"The poor man had been drinking for weeks, and was in a state bordering
on delirium tremens."

"What then? He is the more likely to attempt the fulfilment of his own
prophecies."

"It would not do to permit incidents of this sort to affect one's
nerves."

"Mr. Moore, go home!"

"So soon?"

"Pass straight down the fields, not round by the lade and plantations."

"It is early yet."

"It is late. For my part, I am going in. Will you promise me not to
wander in the Hollow to-night?"

"If you wish it."

"I do wish it. May I ask whether you consider life valueless?"

"By no means. On the contrary, of late I regard my life as invaluable."

"Of late?"

"Existence is neither aimless nor hopeless to me now, and it was both
three months ago. I was then drowning, and rather wished the operation
over. All at once a hand was stretched to me--such a delicate hand I
scarcely dared trust it; its strength, however, has rescued me from
ruin."

"Are you really rescued?"

"For the time. Your assistance has given me another chance."

"Live to make the best of it. Don't offer yourself as a target to
Michael Hartley; and good-night!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Helstone was under a promise to spend the evening of the next day
at Fieldhead. She kept her promise. Some gloomy hours had she spent in
the interval. Most of the time had been passed shut up in her own
apartment, only issuing from it, indeed, to join her uncle at meals, and
anticipating inquiries from Fanny by telling her that she was busy
altering a dress, and preferred sewing upstairs, to avoid interruption.

She did sew. She plied her needle continuously, ceaselessly, but her
brain worked faster than her fingers. Again, and more intensely than
ever, she desired a fixed occupation, no matter how onerous, how
irksome. Her uncle must be once more entreated, but first she would
consult Mrs. Pryor. Her head laboured to frame projects as diligently as
her hands to plait and stitch the thin texture of the muslin summer
dress spread on the little white couch at the foot of which she sat. Now
and then, while thus doubly occupied, a tear would fill her eyes and
fall on her busy hands; but this sign of emotion was rare and quickly
effaced. The sharp pang passed; the dimness cleared from her vision. She
would re-thread her needle, rearrange tuck and trimming, and work on.

Late in the afternoon she dressed herself. She reached Fieldhead, and
appeared in the oak parlour just as tea was brought in. Shirley asked
her why she came so late.

"Because I have been making my dress," said she. "These fine sunny days
began to make me ashamed of my winter merino, so I have furbished up a
lighter garment."

"In which you look as I like to see you," said Shirley. "You are a
lady-like little person, Caroline.--Is she not, Mrs. Pryor?"

Mrs. Pryor never paid compliments, and seldom indulged in remarks,
favourable or otherwise, on personal appearance. On the present occasion
she only swept Caroline's curls from her cheek as she took a seat near
her, caressed the oval outline, and observed, "You get somewhat thin, my
love, and somewhat pale. Do you sleep well? your eyes have a languid
look." And she gazed at her anxiously.

"I sometimes dream melancholy dreams," answered Caroline; "and if I lie
awake for an hour or two in the night, I am continually thinking of the
rectory as a dreary old place. You know it is very near the churchyard.
The back part of the house is extremely ancient, and it is said that the
out-kitchens there were once enclosed in the churchyard, and that there
are graves under them. I rather long to leave the rectory."

"My dear, you are surely not superstitious?"

"No, Mrs. Pryor; but I think I grow what is called nervous. I see things
under a darker aspect than I used to do. I have fears I never used to
have--not of ghosts, but of omens and disastrous events; and I have an
inexpressible weight on my mind which I would give the world to shake
off, and I cannot do it."

"Strange!" cried Shirley. "I never feel so." Mrs. Pryor said nothing.

"Fine weather, pleasant days, pleasant scenes, are powerless to give me
pleasure," continued Caroline. "Calm evenings are not calm to me.
Moonlight, which I used to think mild, now only looks mournful. Is this
weakness of mind, Mrs. Pryor, or what is it? I cannot help it. I often
struggle against it. I reason; but reason and effort make no
difference."

"You should take more exercise," said Mrs. Pryor.

"Exercise! I exercise sufficiently. I exercise till I am ready to drop."

"My dear, you should go from home."

"Mrs. Pryor, I should like to go from home, but not on any purposeless
excursion or visit. I wish to be a governess, as you have been. It would
oblige me greatly if you would speak to my uncle on the subject."

"Nonsense!" broke in Shirley. "What an idea! Be a governess! Better be a
slave at once. Where is the necessity of it? Why should you dream of
such a painful step?"

"My dear," said Mrs. Pryor, "you are very young to be a governess, and
not sufficiently robust. The duties a governess undertakes are often
severe."

