us long to live. Let us help each other through seasons of want and woe
as well as we can, without heeding in the least the scruples of vain
philosophy."

"But you do help others, Shirley. You give a great deal as it is."

"Not enough. I must give more, or, I tell you, my brother's blood will
some day be crying to Heaven against me. For, after all, if political
incendiaries come here to kindle conflagration in the neighbourhood, and
my property is attacked, I shall defend it like a tigress--I know I
shall. Let me listen to Mercy as long as she is near me. Her voice once
drowned by the shout of ruffian defiance, and I shall be full of
impulses to resist and quell. If once the poor gather and rise in the
form of the mob, I shall turn against them as an aristocrat; if they
bully me, I must defy: if they attack, I must resist, and I will."

"You talk like Robert."

"I feel like Robert, only more fierily. Let them meddle with Robert, or
Robert's mill, or Robert's interests, and I shall hate them. At present
I am no patrician, nor do I regard the poor around me as plebeians; but
if once they violently wrong me or mine, and then presume to dictate to
us, I shall quite forget pity for their wretchedness and respect for
their poverty, in scorn of their ignorance and wrath at their
insolence."

"Shirley, how your eyes flash!"

"Because my soul burns. Would you, any more than me, let Robert be borne
down by numbers?"

"If I had your power to aid Robert, I would use it as you mean to use
it. If I could be such a friend to him as you can be, I would stand by
him, as you mean to stand by him, till death."

"And now, Lina, though your eyes don't flash, they glow. You drop your
lids; but I saw a kindled spark. However, it is not yet come to
fighting. What I want to do is to _prevent_ mischief. I cannot forget,
either day or night, that these embittered feelings of the poor against
the rich have been generated in suffering: they would neither hate nor
envy us if they did not deem us so much happier than themselves. To
allay this suffering, and thereby lessen this hate, let me, out of my
abundance, give abundantly; and that the donation may go farther, let it
be made wisely. To that intent, we must introduce some clear, calm,
practical sense into our councils. So go and fetch Miss Ainley."

Without another word Caroline put on her bonnet and departed. It may,
perhaps, appear strange that neither she nor Shirley thought of
consulting Mrs. Pryor on their scheme; but they were wise in abstaining.
To have consulted her--and this they knew by instinct--would only have
been to involve her in painful embarrassment. She was far better
informed, better read, a deeper thinker than Miss Ainley, but of
administrative energy, of executive activity, she had none. She would
subscribe her own modest mite to a charitable object willingly--secret
almsgiving suited her; but in public plans, on a large scale, she could
take no part; as to originating them, that was out of the question. This
Shirley knew, and therefore she did not trouble Mrs. Pryor by unavailing
conferences, which could only remind her of her own deficiencies, and do
no good.

It was a bright day for Miss Ainley when she was summoned to Fieldhead
to deliberate on projects so congenial to her; when she was seated with
all honour and deference at a table with paper, pen, ink, and--what was
best of all--cash before her, and requested to draw up a regular plan
for administering relief to the destitute poor of Briarfield. She, who
knew them all, had studied their wants, had again and again felt in what
way they might best be succoured, could the means of succour only be
found, was fully competent to the undertaking, and a meek exultation
gladdened her kind heart as she felt herself able to answer clearly and
promptly the eager questions put by the two young girls, as she showed
them in her answers how much and what serviceable knowledge she had
acquired of the condition of her fellow-creatures around her.

Shirley placed at her disposal £300, and at sight of the money Miss
Ainley's eyes filled with joyful tears; for she already saw the hungry
fed, the naked clothed, the sick comforted thereby. She quickly drew up
a simple, sensible plan for its expenditure; and she assured them
brighter times would now come round, for she doubted not the lady of
Fieldhead's example would be followed by others. She should try to get
additional subscriptions, and to form a fund; but first she must consult
the clergy. Yes, on that point she was peremptory. Mr. Helstone, Dr.
Boultby, Mr. Hall, _must_ be consulted (for not only must Briarfield be
relieved, but Whinbury and Nunnely). It would, she averred, be
presumption in her to take a single step unauthorized by them.

The clergy were sacred beings in Miss Ainley's eyes; no matter what
might be the insignificance of the individual, his station made him
holy. The very curates--who, in their trivial arrogance, were hardly
worthy to tie her patten-strings, or carry her cotton umbrella, or check
woollen shawl--she, in her pure, sincere enthusiasm, looked upon as
sucking saints. No matter how clearly their little vices and enormous
absurdities were pointed out to her, she could not see them; she was
blind to ecclesiastical defects; the white surplice covered a multitude
of sins.

Shirley, knowing this harmless infatuation on the part of her
recently-chosen prime minister, stipulated expressly that the curates
were to have no voice in the disposal of the money, that their meddling
fingers were not to be inserted into the pie. The rectors, of course,
must be paramount, and they might be trusted. They had some experience,
some sagacity, and Mr. Hall, at least, had sympathy and loving-kindness
for his fellow-men; but as for the youth under them, they must be set
aside, kept down, and taught that subordination and silence best became
their years and capacity.

It was with some horror Miss Ainley heard this language. Caroline,
however, interposing with a mild word or two in praise of Mr Sweeting,
calmed her again. Sweeting was, indeed, her own favourite. She
endeavoured to respect Messrs. Malone and Donne, but the slices of
sponge-cake and glasses of cowslip or primrose wine she had at different
times administered to Sweeting, when he came to see her in her little
cottage, were ever offered with sentiments of truly motherly regard. The
same innocuous collation she had once presented to Malone; but that
personage evinced such open scorn of the offering, she had never
ventured to renew it. To Donne she always served the treat, and was
happy to see his approbation of it proved beyond a doubt by the fact of
his usually eating two pieces of cake, and putting a third in his
pocket.

Indefatigable in her exertions where good was to be done, Miss Ainley
would immediately have set out on a walk of ten miles round to the three
rectors, in order to show her plan, and humbly solicit their approval;
but Miss Keeldar interdicted this, and proposed, as an amendment, to
collect the clergy in a small select reunion that evening at Fieldhead.
Miss Ainley was to meet them, and the plan was to be discussed in full
privy council.

Shirley managed to get the senior priesthood together accordingly, and
before the old maid's arrival, she had, further, talked all the
gentlemen into the most charming mood imaginable. She herself had taken
in hand Dr. Boultby and Mr. Helstone. The first was a stubborn old
Welshman, hot, opinionated, and obstinate, but withal a man who did a
great deal of good, though not without making some noise about it. The
latter we know. She had rather a friendly feeling for both, especially
for old Helstone; and it cost her no trouble to be quite delightful to
them. She took them round the garden; she gathered them flowers; she was
like a kind daughter to them. Mr. Hall she left to Caroline--or rather,
it was to Caroline's care Mr. Hall consigned himself.

He generally sought Caroline in every party where she and he happened to
be. He was not in general a lady's man, though all ladies liked him;
something of a book-worm he was, near-sighted, spectacled, now and then
abstracted. To old ladies he was kind as a son. To men of every
occupation and grade he was acceptable. The truth, simplicity, frankness
of his manners, the nobleness of his integrity, the reality and
elevation of his piety, won him friends in every grade. His poor clerk
and sexton delighted in him; the noble patron of his living esteemed him
highly. It was only with young, handsome, fashionable, and stylish
ladies he felt a little shy. Being himself a plain man--plain in aspect,
plain in manners, plain in speech--he seemed to fear their dash,
elegance, and airs. But Miss Helstone had neither dash nor airs, and her
native elegance was of a very quiet order--quiet as the beauty of a
ground-loving hedge-flower. He was a fluent, cheerful, agreeable talker.
Caroline could talk too in a _tête-à-tête_. She liked Mr. Hall to come
and take the seat next her in a party, and thus secure her from Peter
Augustus Malone, Joseph Donne, or John Sykes; and Mr. Hall never failed
to avail himself of this privilege when he possibly could. Such
preference shown by a single gentleman to a single lady would certainly,
in ordinary cases, have set in motion the tongues of the gossips; but
Cyril Hall was forty-five years old, slightly bald, and slightly gray,
and nobody ever said or thought he was likely to be married to Miss
Helstone. Nor did he think so himself. He was wedded already to his
books and his parish. His kind sister Margaret, spectacled and learned
like himself, made him happy in his single state; he considered it too
late to change. Besides, he had known Caroline as a pretty little girl.
She had sat on his knee many a time; he had bought her toys and given
her books; he felt that her friendship for him was mixed with a sort of
filial respect; he could not have brought himself to attempt to give
another colour to her sentiments, and his serene mind could glass a fair
image without feeling its depths troubled by the reflection.

When Miss Ainley arrived, she was made kindly welcome by every one. Mrs.
Pryor and Margaret Hall made room for her on the sofa between them; and
when the three were seated, they formed a trio which the gay and
thoughtless would have scorned, indeed, as quite worthless and
unattractive--a middle-aged widow and two plain, spectacled old
maids--yet which had its own quiet value, as many a suffering and
friendless human being knew.

Shirley opened the business and showed the plan.

"I know the hand which drew up that," said Mr. Hall, glancing at Miss
Ainley, and smiling benignantly. His approbation was won at once.
Boultby heard and deliberated with bent brow and protruded under lip.
His consent he considered too weighty to be given in a hurry. Helstone
glanced sharply round with an alert, suspicious expression, as if he
apprehended that female craft was at work, and that something in
petticoats was somehow trying underhand to acquire too much influence,
and make itself of too much importance. Shirley caught and comprehended
the expression. "This scheme is nothing," said she carelessly. "It is
only an outline--a mere suggestion. You, gentlemen, are requested to
draw up rules of your own."

And she directly fetched her writing-case, smiling queerly to herself as
she bent over the table where it stood. She produced a sheet of paper, a
new pen, drew an arm-chair to the table, and presenting her hand to old
Helstone, begged permission to install him in it. For a minute he was a
little stiff, and stood wrinkling his copper-coloured forehead
strangely. At last he muttered, "Well, you are neither my wife nor my
daughter, so I'll be led for once; but mind--I know I _am_ led. Your
little female manœuvres don't blind me."

"Oh!" said Shirley, dipping the pen in the ink, and putting it into his
hand, "you must regard me as Captain Keeldar to-day. This is quite a
gentleman's affair--yours and mine entirely, doctor" (so she had dubbed
the rector). "The ladies there are only to be our aides-de-camp, and at
their peril they speak, till we have settled the whole business."

He smiled a little grimly, and began to write. He soon interrupted
himself to ask questions, and consult his brethren, disdainfully lifting
his glance over the curly heads of the two girls and the demure caps of
the elder ladies, to meet the winking glasses and gray pates of the
priests. In the discussion which ensued, all three gentlemen, to their
infinite credit, showed a thorough acquaintance with the poor of their
parishes--an even minute knowledge of their separate wants. Each rector
knew where clothing was needed, where food would be most acceptable,
where money could be bestowed with a probability of it being judiciously
laid out. Wherever their memories fell short, Miss Ainley or Miss Hall,
if applied to, could help them out; but both ladies took care not to
speak unless spoken to. Neither of them wanted to be foremost, but each
sincerely desired to be useful; and useful the clergy consented to make
them--with which boon they were content.

Shirley stood behind the rectors, leaning over their shoulders now and
then to glance at the rules drawn up and the list of cases making out,
listening to all they said, and still at intervals smiling her queer
smile--a smile not ill-natured, but significant--too significant to be
generally thought amiable. Men rarely like such of their fellows as read
their inward nature too clearly and truly. It is good for women,
especially, to be endowed with a soft blindness; to have mild, dim eyes,
that never penetrate below the surface of things--that take all for what
it seems. Thousands, knowing this, keep their eyelids drooped on system;
but the most downcast glance has its loophole, through which it can, on
occasion, take its sentinel-survey of life. I remember once seeing a
pair of blue eyes, that were usually thought sleepy, secretly on the
alert, and I knew by their expression--an expression which chilled my
blood, it was in that quarter so wondrously unexpected--that for years
they had been accustomed to silent soul-reading. The world called the
owner of these blue eyes _bonne petite femme_ (she was not an
Englishwoman). I learned her nature afterwards--got it off by
heart--studied it in its farthest, most hidden recesses. She was the
finest, deepest, subtlest schemer in Europe.

When all was at length settled to Miss Keeldar's mind, and the clergy
had entered so fully into the spirit of her plans as to head the
subscription-list with their signatures for £50 each, she ordered supper
to be served, having previously directed Mrs. Gill to exercise her
utmost skill in the preparation of this repast. Mr. Hall was no _bon
vivant_--he was naturally an abstemious man, indifferent to luxury; but
Boultby and Helstone both liked good cookery. The _recherché_ supper
consequently put them into excellent humour. They did justice to it,
though in a gentlemanly way--not in the mode Mr. Donne would have done
had he been present. A glass of fine wine was likewise tasted, with
discerning though most decorous relish. Captain Keeldar was complimented
on his taste; the compliment charmed him. It had been his aim to gratify
and satisfy his priestly guests. He had succeeded, and was radiant with
glee.




CHAPTER XV.

MR. DONNE'S EXODUS.


The next day Shirley expressed to Caroline how delighted she felt that
the little party had gone off so well.

"I rather like to entertain a circle of gentlemen," said she. "It is
amusing to observe how they enjoy a judiciously concocted repast. For
ourselves, you see, these choice wines and these scientific dishes are
of no importance to us; but gentlemen seem to retain something of the
_naïveté_ of children about food, and one likes to please them--that is,
when they show the becoming, decent self-government of our admirable
rectors. I watch Moore sometimes, to try and discover how he can be
pleased; but he has not that child's simplicity about him. Did you ever
find out his accessible point, Caroline? you have seen more of him than
I."

"It is not, at any rate, that of my uncle and Dr. Boultby," returned
Caroline, smiling. She always felt a sort of shy pleasure in following
Miss Keeldar's lead respecting the discussion of her cousin's character.
Left to herself, she would never have touched on the subject; but when
invited, the temptation of talking about him of whom she was ever
thinking was irresistible. "But," she added, "I really don't know what
it is, for I never watched Robert in my life but my scrutiny was
presently baffled by finding he was watching me."

"There it is!" exclaimed Shirley. "You can't fix your eyes on him but
his presently flash on you. He is never off his guard. He won't give you
an advantage. Even when he does not look at you, his thoughts seem to be
busy amongst your own thoughts, tracing your words and actions to their
source, contemplating your motives at his ease. Oh! I know that sort of
character, or something in the same style. It is one that piques me
singularly. How does it affect you?"

This question was a specimen of one of Shirley's sharp, sudden turns.
Caroline used to be fluttered by them at first, but she had now got into
the way of parrying these home-thrusts like a little Quakeress.

"Pique you? In what way does it pique you?" she said.

"Here he comes!" suddenly exclaimed Shirley, breaking off, starting up
and running to the window. "Here comes a diversion. I never told you of
a superb conquest I have made lately--made at those parties to which I
can never persuade you to accompany me; and the thing has been done
without effort or intention on my part--that I aver. There is the
bell--and, by all that's delicious! there are two of them. Do they never
hunt, then, except in couples? You may have one, Lina, and you may take
your choice. I hope I am generous enough. Listen to Tartar!"

The black-muzzled, tawny dog, a glimpse of which was seen in the chapter
which first introduced its mistress to the reader, here gave tongue in
the hall, amidst whose hollow space the deep bark resounded formidably.
A growl more terrible than the bark, menacing as muttered thunder,
succeeded.

"Listen!" again cried Shirley, laughing. "You would think that the
prelude to a bloody onslaught. They will be frightened. They don't know
old Tartar as I do. They are not aware his uproars are all sound and
fury, signifying nothing!"

Some bustle was heard. "Down, sir, down!" exclaimed a high-toned,
imperious voice, and then came a crack of a cane or whip. Immediately
there was a yell--a scutter--a run--a positive tumult.

"O Malone, Malone!"

"Down! down! down!" cried the high voice.

"He really is worrying them!" exclaimed Shirley. "They have struck him.
A blow is what he is not used to, and will not take."

Out she ran. A gentleman was fleeing up the oak staircase, making for
refuge in the gallery or chambers in hot haste; another was backing fast
to the stairfoot, wildly flourishing a knotty stick, at the same time
reiterating, "Down! down! down!" while the tawny dog bayed, bellowed,
howled at him, and a group of servants came bundling from the kitchen.
The dog made a spring; the second gentleman turned tail and rushed after
his comrade. The first was already safe in a bedroom; he held the door
against his fellow--nothing so merciless as terror. But the other
fugitive struggled hard; the door was about to yield to his strength.

"Gentlemen," was uttered in Miss Keeldar's silvery but vibrating tones,
"spare my locks, if you please. Calm yourselves! Come down! Look at
Tartar; he won't harm a cat."

She was caressing the said Tartar. He lay crouched at her feet, his fore
paws stretched out, his tail still in threatening agitation, his
nostrils snorting, his bulldog eyes conscious of a dull fire. He was an
honest, phlegmatic, stupid, but stubborn canine character. He loved his
mistress and John--the man who fed him--but was mostly indifferent to
the rest of the world. Quiet enough he was, unless struck or threatened
with a stick, and that put a demon into him at once.

"Mr. Malone, how do you do?" continued Shirley, lifting up her mirth-lit
face to the gallery. "That is not the way to the oak parlour; that is
Mrs. Pryor's apartment. Request your friend Mr. Donne to evacuate. I
shall have the greatest pleasure in receiving him in a lower room."

"Ha! ha!" cried Malone, in hollow laughter, quitting the door, and
leaning over the massive balustrade. "Really that animal alarmed Donne.
He is a little timid," he proceeded, stiffening himself, and walking
trimly to the stairhead. "I thought it better to follow, in order to
reassure him."

"It appears you did. Well, come down, if you please.--John" (turning to
her manservant), "go upstairs and liberate Mr. Donne.--Take care, Mr.
Malone; the stairs are slippery."

In truth they were, being of polished oak. The caution came a little
late for Malone. He had slipped already in his stately descent, and was
only saved from falling by a clutch at the banisters, which made the
whole structure creak again.

Tartar seemed to think the visitor's descent effected with unwarranted
_éclat_, and accordingly he growled once more. Malone, however, was no
coward. The spring of the dog had taken him by surprise, but he passed
him now in suppressed fury rather than fear. If a look could have
strangled Tartar, he would have breathed no more. Forgetting politeness
in his sullen rage, Malone pushed into the parlour before Miss Keeldar.
He glanced at Miss Helstone; he could scarcely bring himself to bend to
her. He glared on both the ladies. He looked as if, had either of them
been his wife, he would have made a glorious husband at the moment. In
each hand he seemed as if he would have liked to clutch one and gripe
her to death.

However, Shirley took pity. She ceased to laugh; and Caroline was too
true a lady to smile even at any one under mortification. Tartar was
dismissed; Peter Augustus was soothed--for Shirley had looks and tones
that might soothe a very bull. He had sense to feel that, since he could
not challenge the owner of the dog, he had better be civil. And civil he
tried to be; and his attempts being well received, he grew presently
_very_ civil and quite himself again. He had come, indeed, for the
express purpose of making himself charming and fascinating. Rough
portents had met him on his first admission to Fieldhead; but that
passage got over, charming and fascinating he resolved to be. Like
March, having come in like a lion, he purposed to go out like a lamb.

For the sake of air, as it appeared, or perhaps for that of ready exit
in case of some new emergency arising, he took his seat,--not on the
sofa, where Miss Keeldar offered him enthronization, nor yet near the
fireside, to which Caroline, by a friendly sign, gently invited him, but
on a chair close to the door. Being no longer sullen or furious, he
grew, after his fashion, constrained and embarrassed. He talked to the
ladies by fits and starts, choosing for topics whatever was most
intensely commonplace. He sighed deeply, significantly, at the close of
every sentence; he sighed in each pause; he sighed ere he opened his
mouth. At last, finding it desirable to add ease to his other charms, he
drew forth to aid him an ample silk pocket-handkerchief. This was to be
the graceful toy with which his unoccupied hands were to trifle. He went
to work with a certain energy. He folded the red-and-yellow square
cornerwise; he whipped it open with a waft; again he folded it in
narrower compass; he made of it a handsome band. To what purpose would
he proceed to apply the ligature? Would he wrap it about his throat--his
head? Should it be a comforter or a turban? Neither. Peter Augustus had
an inventive, an original genius. He was about to show the ladies graces
of action possessing at least the charm of novelty. He sat on the chair
with his athletic Irish legs crossed, and these legs, in that attitude,
he circled with the bandana and bound firmly together. It was evident
he felt this device to be worth an encore; he repeated it more than
once. The second performance sent Shirley to the window, to laugh her
silent but irrepressible laugh unseen; it turned Caroline's head aside,
that her long curls might screen the smile mantling on her features.
Miss Helstone, indeed, was amused by more than one point in Peter's
demeanour. She was edified at the complete though abrupt diversion of
his homage from herself to the heiress. The £5,000 he supposed her
likely one day to inherit were not to be weighed in the balance against
Miss Keeldar's estate and hall. He took no pains to conceal his
calculations and tactics. He pretended to no gradual change of views; he
wheeled about at once. The pursuit of the lesser fortune was openly
relinquished for that of the greater. On what grounds he expected to
succeed in his chase himself best knew; certainly not by skilful
management.

From the length of time that elapsed, it appeared that John had some
difficulty in persuading Mr. Donne to descend. At length, however, that
gentleman appeared; nor, as he presented himself at the oak-parlour
door, did he seem in the slightest degree ashamed or confused--not a
whit. Donne, indeed, was of that coldly phlegmatic, immovably
complacent, densely self-satisfied nature which is insensible to shame.
He had never blushed in his life; no humiliation could abash him; his
nerves were not capable of sensation enough to stir his life and make
colour mount to his cheek; he had no fire in his blood and no modesty in
his soul; he was a frontless, arrogant, decorous slip of the
commonplace--conceited, inane, insipid; and this gentleman had a notion
of wooing Miss Keeldar! He knew no more, however, how to set about the
business than if he had been an image carved in wood. He had no idea of
a taste to be pleased, a heart to be reached in courtship. His notion
was, when he should have formally visited her a few times, to write a
letter proposing marriage. Then he calculated she would accept him for
love of his office; then they would be married; then he should be master
of Fieldhead; and he should live very comfortably, have servants at his
command, eat and drink of the best, and be a great man. You would not
have suspected his intentions when he addressed his intended bride in an
impertinent, injured tone--"A very dangerous dog that, Miss Keeldar. I
wonder you should keep such an animal."

"Do you, Mr. Donne? Perhaps you will wonder more when I tell you I am
very fond of him."

"I should say you are not serious in the assertion. Can't fancy a lady
fond of that brute--'tis so ugly--a mere carter's dog. Pray hang him."

"Hang what I am fond of!"

"And purchase in his stead some sweetly pooty pug or poodle--something
appropriate to the fair sex. Ladies generally like lap-dogs."

"Perhaps I am an exception."

"Oh, you can't be, you know. All ladies are alike in those matters. That
is universally allowed."

"Tartar frightened you terribly, Mr. Donne. I hope you won't take any
harm."

"That I shall, no doubt. He gave me a turn I shall not soon forget. When
I _sor_ him" (such was Mr. Donne's pronunciation) "about to spring, I
thought I should have fainted."

"Perhaps you did faint in the bedroom; you were a long time there."

"No; I bore up that I might hold the door fast. I was determined not to
let any one enter. I thought I would keep a barrier between me and the
enemy."

"But what if your friend Mr. Malone had been worried?"

"Malone must take care of himself. Your man persuaded me to come out at
last by saying the dog was chained up in his kennel. If I had not been
assured of this, I would have remained all day in the chamber. But what
is that? I declare the man has told a falsehood! The dog is there!"

And indeed Tartar walked past the glass door opening to the garden,
stiff, tawny, and black-muzzled as ever. He still seemed in bad humour.
He was growling again, and whistling a half-strangled whistle, being an
inheritance from the bulldog side of his ancestry.

"There are other visitors coming," observed Shirley, with that provoking
coolness which the owners of formidable-looking dogs are apt to show
while their animals are all bristle and bay. Tartar sprang down the
pavement towards the gate, bellowing _avec explosion_. His mistress
quietly opened the glass door, and stepped out chirruping to him. His
bellow was already silenced, and he was lifting up his huge, blunt,
stupid head to the new callers to be patted.

"What! Tartar, Tartar!" said a cheery, rather boyish voice, "don't you
know us? Good-morning, old boy!"

And little Mr. Sweeting, whose conscious good nature made him
comparatively fearless of man, woman, child, or brute, came through the
gate, caressing the guardian. His vicar, Mr. Hall, followed. He had no
fear of Tartar either, and Tartar had no ill-will to him. He snuffed
both the gentlemen round, and then, as if concluding that they were
harmless, and might be allowed to pass, he withdrew to the sunny front
of the hall, leaving the archway free. Mr. Sweeting followed, and would
have played with him; but Tartar took no notice of his caresses. It was
only his mistress's hand whose touch gave him pleasure; to all others he
showed himself obstinately insensible.

Shirley advanced to meet Messrs. Hall and Sweeting, shaking hands with
them cordially. They were come to tell her of certain successes they had
achieved that morning in applications for subscriptions to the fund. Mr.
Hall's eyes beamed benignantly through his spectacles, his plain face
looked positively handsome with goodness; and when Caroline, seeing who
was come, ran out to meet him, and put both her hands into his, he gazed
down on her with a gentle, serene, affectionate expression that gave him
the aspect of a smiling Melanchthon.

Instead of re-entering the house, they strayed through the garden, the
ladies walking one on each side of Mr. Hall. It was a breezy sunny day;
the air freshened the girls' cheeks and gracefully dishevelled their
ringlets. Both of them looked pretty--one gay. Mr. Hall spoke oftenest
to his brilliant companion, looked most frequently at the quiet one.
Miss Keeldar gathered handfuls of the profusely blooming flowers whose
perfume filled the enclosure. She gave some to Caroline, telling her to
choose a nosegay for Mr. Hall; and with her lap filled with delicate and
splendid blossoms, Caroline sat down on the steps of a summer-house. The
vicar stood near her, leaning on his cane.

Shirley, who could not be inhospitable, now called out the neglected
pair in the oak parlour. She convoyed Donne past his dread enemy Tartar,
who, with his nose on his fore paws, lay snoring under the meridian sun.
Donne was not grateful--he never _was_ grateful for kindness and
attention--but he was glad of the safeguard. Miss Keeldar, desirous of
being impartial, offered the curates flowers. They accepted them with
native awkwardness. Malone seemed specially at a loss, when a bouquet
filled one hand, while his shillelah occupied the other. Donne's "Thank
you!" was rich to hear. It was the most fatuous and arrogant of sounds,
implying that he considered this offering a homage to his merits, and an
attempt on the part of the heiress to ingratiate herself into his
priceless affections. Sweeting alone received the posy like a smart,
sensible little man, as he was, putting it gallantly and nattily into
his buttonhole.

As a reward for his good manners, Miss Keeldar, beckoning him apart,
gave him some commission, which made his eyes sparkle with glee. Away he
flew, round by the courtyard to the kitchen. No need to give him
directions; he was always at home everywhere. Ere long he reappeared,
carrying a round table, which he placed under the cedar; then he
collected six garden-chairs from various nooks and bowers in the
grounds, and placed them in a circle. The parlour-maid--Miss Keeldar
kept no footman--came out, bearing a napkin-covered tray. Sweeting's
nimble fingers aided in disposing glasses, plates, knives, and forks; he
assisted her too in setting forth a neat luncheon, consisting of cold
chicken, ham, and tarts.

This sort of impromptu regale it was Shirley's delight to offer any
chance guests; and nothing pleased her better than to have an alert,
obliging little friend, like Sweeting, to run about her hand, cheerily
receive and briskly execute her hospitable hints. David and she were on
the best terms in the world; and his devotion to the heiress was quite
disinterested, since it prejudiced in nothing his faithful allegiance to
the magnificent Dora Sykes.

The repast turned out a very merry one. Donne and Malone, indeed,
contributed but little to its vivacity, the chief part they played in it
being what concerned the knife, fork, and wine-glass; but where four
such natures as Mr. Hall, David Sweeting, Shirley, and Caroline were
assembled in health and amity, on a green lawn, under a sunny sky,
amidst a wilderness of flowers, there could not be ungenial dullness.

In the course of conversation Mr. Hall reminded the ladies that
Whitsuntide was approaching, when the grand united Sunday-school
tea-drinking and procession of the three parishes of Briarfield,
Whinbury, and Nunnely were to take place. Caroline, he knew, would be at
her post as teacher, he said, and he hoped Miss Keeldar would not be
wanting. He hoped she would make her first public appearance amongst
them at that time. Shirley was not the person to miss an occasion of
this sort. She liked festive excitement, a gathering of happiness, a
concentration and combination of pleasant details, a throng of glad
faces, a muster of elated hearts. She told Mr. Hall they might count on
her with security. She did not know what she would have to do, but they
might dispose of her as they pleased.

"And," said Caroline, "you will promise to come to my table, and to sit
near me, Mr. Hall?"

"I shall not fail, _Deo volente_," said he.--"I have occupied the place
on her right hand at these monster tea-drinkings for the last six
years," he proceeded, turning to Miss Keeldar. "They made her a
Sunday-school teacher when she was a little girl of twelve. She is not
particularly self-confident by nature, as you may have observed; and the
first time she had to 'take a tray,' as the phrase is, and make tea in
public, there was some piteous trembling and flushing. I observed the
speechless panic, the cups shaking in the little hand, and the
overflowing teapot filled too full from the urn. I came to her aid, took
a seat near her, managed the urn and the slop-basin, and in fact made
the tea for her like any old woman."

"I was very grateful to you," interposed Caroline.

"You were. You told me so with an earnest sincerity that repaid me well,
inasmuch as it was not like the majority of little ladies of twelve,
whom you may help and caress for ever without their evincing any quicker
sense of the kindness done and meant than if they were made of wax and
wood instead of flesh and nerves.--She kept close to me, Miss Keeldar,
the rest of the evening, walking with me over the grounds where the
children were playing; she followed me into the vestry when all were
summoned into church; she would, I believe, have mounted with me to the
pulpit, had I not taken the previous precaution of conducting her to the
rectory pew."

"And he has been my friend ever since," said Caroline.

"And always sat at her table, near her tray, and handed the cups--that
is the extent of my services. The next thing I do for her will be to
marry her some day to some curate or mill-owner.--But mind, Caroline, I
shall inquire about the bridegroom's character; and if he is not a
gentleman likely to render happy the little girl who walked with me
hand in hand over Nunnely Common, I will not officiate. So take care."

"The caution is useless. I am not going to be married. I shall live
single, like your sister Margaret, Mr. Hall."

"Very well. You might do worse. Margaret is not unhappy. She has her
books for a pleasure, and her brother for a care, and is content. If
ever you want a home, if the day should come when Briarfield rectory is
yours no longer, come to Nunnely vicarage. Should the old maid and
bachelor be still living, they will make you tenderly welcome."

"There are your flowers. Now," said Caroline, who had kept the nosegay
she had selected for him till this moment, "_you_ don't care for a
bouquet, but you must give it to Margaret; only--to be sentimental for
once--keep that little forget-me-not, which is a wild flower I gathered
from the grass; and--to be still more sentimental--let me take two or
three of the blue blossoms and put them in my souvenir."

And she took out a small book with enamelled cover and silver clasp,
wherein, having opened it, she inserted the flowers, writing round them
in pencil, "To be kept for the sake of the Rev. Cyril Hall, my friend.
May --, 18--."

The Rev. Cyril Hall, on his part, also placed a sprig in safety between
the leaves of a pocket Testament. He only wrote on the margin,
"Caroline."

"Now," said he, smiling, "I trust we are romantic enough. Miss Keeldar,"
he continued (the curates, by-the-bye, during this conversation, were
too much occupied with their own jokes to notice what passed at the
other end of the table), "I hope you are laughing at this trait of
'_exaltation_' in the old gray-headed vicar; but the fact is, I am so
used to comply with the requests of this young friend of yours, I don't
know how to refuse her when she tells me to do anything. You would say
it is not much in my way to traffic with flowers and forget-me-nots;
but, you see, when requested to be sentimental, I am obedient."

"He is naturally rather sentimental," remarked Caroline. "Margaret told
me so, and I know what pleases him."

"That you should be good and happy? Yes; that is one of my greatest
pleasures. May God long preserve to you the blessings of peace and
innocence! By which phrase I mean _comparative_ innocence; for in His
sight, I am well aware, _none_ are pure. What to our human perceptions
looks spotless as we fancy angels, is to Him but frailty, needing the
blood of His Son to cleanse, and the strength of His Spirit to sustain.
Let us each and all cherish humility--I, as you, my young friends; and
we may well do it when we look into our own hearts, and see there
temptations, inconsistencies, propensities, even we blush to recognize.
And it is not youth, nor good looks, nor grace, nor any gentle outside
charm which makes either beauty or goodness in God's eyes.--Young
ladies, when your mirror or men's tongues flatter you, remember that, in
the sight of her Maker, Mary Ann Ainley--a woman whom neither glass nor
lips have ever panegyrized--is fairer and better than either of you. She
is indeed," he added, after a pause--"she is indeed. You young things,
wrapt up in yourselves and in earthly hopes, scarcely live as Christ
lived. Perhaps you cannot do it yet, while existence is so sweet and
earth so smiling to you; it would be too much to expect. She, with meek
heart and due reverence, treads close in her Redeemer's steps."

Here the harsh voice of Donne broke in on the mild tones of Mr. Hall.
"Ahem!" he began, clearing his throat evidently for a speech of some
importance--"ahem! Miss Keeldar, your attention an instant, if you
please."

"Well," said Shirley nonchalantly, "what is it? I listen. All of me is
ear that is not eye."

"I hope part of you is hand also," returned Donne, in his vulgarly
presumptuous and familiar style, "and part purse. It is to the hand and
purse I propose to appeal. I came here this morning with a view to beg
of you----"

"You should have gone to Mrs. Gill; she is my almoner."

"To beg of you a subscription to a school. I and Dr. Boultby intend to
erect one in the hamlet of Ecclefigg, which is under our vicarage of
Whinbury. The Baptists have got possession of it. They have a chapel
there, and we want to dispute the ground."

"But I have nothing to do with Ecclefigg. I possess no property there."

"What does that signify? You're a churchwoman, ain't you?"

"Admirable creature!" muttered Shirley, under her breath. "Exquisite
address! Fine style! What raptures he excites in me!" Then aloud, "I am
a churchwoman, certainly."

"Then you can't refuse to contribute in this case. The population of
Ecclefigg are a parcel of brutes; we want to civilize them."

"Who is to be the missionary?"

"Myself, probably."

"You won't fail through lack of sympathy with your flock."

"I hope not--I expect success; but we must have money. There is the
paper. Pray give a handsome sum."

When asked for money, Shirley rarely held back. She put down her name
for £5. After the £300 she had lately given, and the many smaller sums
she was giving constantly, it was as much as she could at present
afford. Donne looked at it, declared the subscription "shabby," and
clamorously demanded more. Miss Keeldar flushed up with some indignation
and more astonishment.

"At present I shall give no more," said she.

"Not give more! Why, I expected you to head the list with a cool
hundred. With your property, you should never put down a signature for
less."

She was silent.

"In the south," went on Donne, "a lady with a thousand a year would be
ashamed to give five pounds for a public object."

Shirley, so rarely haughty, looked so now. Her slight frame became
nerved; her distinguished face quickened with scorn.

"Strange remarks?" said she--"most inconsiderate! Reproach in return for
bounty is misplaced."

"Bounty! Do you call five pounds bounty?"

"I do; and bounty which, had I not given it to Dr. Boultby's intended
school, of the erection of which I approve, and in no sort to his
curate, who seems ill-advised in his manner of applying for, or rather
extorting, subscriptions--bounty, I repeat, which, but for this
consideration, I should instantly reclaim."

Donne was thick-skinned. He did not feel all or half that the tone, air,
glance of the speaker expressed. He knew not on what ground he stood.

"Wretched place this Yorkshire," he went on. "I could never have formed
an idea_r_ of the country had I not seen it. And the people--rich and
poor--what a set! How _corse_ and uncultivated! They would be scouted in
the south."

Shirley leaned forwards on the table, her nostrils dilating a little,
her taper fingers interlaced and compressing each other hard.

"The rich," pursued the infatuated and unconscious Donne, "are a parcel
of misers, never living as persons with their incomes ought to live. You
scarsley"--(you must excuse Mr. Donne's pronunciation, reader; it was
very choice; he considered it genteel, and prided himself on his
southern accent; northern ears received with singular sensations his
utterance of certain words)--"you scarsley ever see a fam'ly where a
propa carriage or a reg'la butla is kep; and as to the poor--just look
at them when they come crowding about the church doors on the occasion
of a marriage or a funeral, clattering in clogs; the men in their
shirt-sleeves and wool-combers' aprons, the women in mob-caps and
bed-gowns. They positively deserve that one should turn a mad cow in
amongst them to rout their rabble-ranks. He-he! what fun it would be!"

"There! you have reached the climax," said Shirley quietly. "You have
reached the climax," she repeated, turning her glowing glance towards
him. "You cannot go beyond it, and," she added with emphasis, "you
_shall_ not, in my house."

Up she rose--nobody could control her now, for she was
exasperated--straight she walked to her garden gates, wide she flung
them open.

"Walk through," she said austerely, "and pretty quickly, and set foot on
this pavement no more."

Donne was astounded. He had thought all the time he was showing himself
off to high advantage, as a lofty-souled person of the first "ton;" he
imagined he was producing a crushing impression. Had he not expressed
disdain of everything in Yorkshire? What more conclusive proof could be
given that he was better than anything there? And yet here was he about
to be turned like a dog out of a Yorkshire garden! Where, under such
circumstances, was the "concatenation accordingly"?

"Rid me of you instantly--instantly!" reiterated Shirley, as he
lingered.

"Madam--a clergyman! turn out a clergyman!"

"Off! Were you an archbishop you have proved yourself no gentleman, and
must go. Quick!"

She was quite resolved. There was no trifling with her. Besides, Tartar
was again rising; he perceived symptoms of a commotion; he manifested a
disposition to join in. There was evidently nothing for it but to go,
and Donne made his exodus, the heiress sweeping him a deep curtsy as she
closed the gates on him.

"How dare the pompous priest abuse his flock! How dare the lisping
cockney revile Yorkshire!" was her sole observation on the circumstance,
as she returned to the table.

Ere long the little party broke up; Miss Keeldar's ruffled and darkened
brow, curled lip, and incensed eye gave no invitation to further social
enjoyment.




CHAPTER XVI.

WHITSUNTIDE.


The fund prospered. By dint of Miss Keeldar's example, the three
rectors' vigorous exertions, and the efficient though quiet aid of their
spinster and spectacled lieutenants, Mary Ann Ainley and Margaret Hall,
a handsome sum was raised; and this being judiciously managed, served
for the present greatly to alleviate the distress of the unemployed
poor. The neighbourhood seemed to grow calmer. For a fortnight past no
cloth had been destroyed; no outrage on mill or mansion had been
committed in the three parishes. Shirley was sanguine that the evil she
wished to avert was almost escaped, that the threatened storm was
passing over. With the approach of summer she felt certain that trade
would improve--it always did; and then this weary war could not last for
ever; peace must return one day. With peace, what an impulse would be
given to commerce!

Such was the usual tenor of her observations to her tenant, Gérard
Moore, whenever she met him where they could converse; and Moore would
listen very quietly--too quietly to satisfy her. She would then by her
impatient glance demand something more from him--some explanation, or at
least some additional remark. Smiling in his way, with that expression
which gave a remarkable cast of sweetness to his mouth, while his brow
remained grave, he would answer to the effect that himself too trusted
in the finite nature of the war; that it was indeed on that ground the
anchor of his hopes was fixed; thereon his speculations depended. "For
you are aware," he would continue, "that I now work Hollow's Mill
entirely on speculation. I sell nothing; there is no market for my
goods. I manufacture for a future day. I make myself ready to take
advantage of the first opening that shall occur. Three months ago this
was impossible to me; I had exhausted both credit and capital. You well
know who came to my rescue, from what hand I received the loan which
saved me. It is on the strength of that loan I am enabled to continue
the bold game which, a while since, I feared I should never play more.
Total ruin I know will follow loss, and I am aware that gain is
doubtful; but I am quite cheerful. So long as I can be active, so long
as I can strive, so long, in short, as my hands are not tied, it is
impossible for me to be depressed. One year--nay, but six months--of the
reign of the olive, and I am safe; for, as you say, peace will give an
impulse to commerce. In this you are right; but as to the restored
tranquillity of the neighbourhood, as to the permanent good effect of
your charitable fund, I doubt. Eleemosynary relief never yet
tranquillized the working-classes--it never made them grateful; it is
not in human nature that it should. I suppose, were all things ordered
aright, they ought not to be in a position to need that humiliating
relief; and this they feel. We should feel it were we so placed.
Besides, to whom should they be grateful? To you, to the clergy perhaps,
but not to us mill-owners. They hate us worse than ever. Then the
disaffected here are in correspondence with the disaffected elsewhere.
Nottingham is one of their headquarters, Manchester another, Birmingham
a third. The subalterns receive orders from their chiefs; they are in a
good state of discipline; no blow is struck without mature deliberation.
In sultry weather you have seen the sky threaten thunder day by day, and
yet night after night the clouds have cleared, and the sun has set
quietly; but the danger was not gone--it was only delayed. The
long-threatening storm is sure to break at last. There is analogy
between the moral and physical atmosphere."

"Well, Mr. Moore" (so these conferences always ended), "take care of
yourself. If you think that I have ever done you any good, reward me by
promising to take care of yourself."

"I do; I will take close and watchful care. I wish to live, not to die.
The future opens like Eden before me; and still, when I look deep into
the shades of my paradise, I see a vision that I like better than seraph
or cherub glide across remote vistas."

"Do you? Pray, what vision?"

"I see----"

The maid came bustling in with the tea-things.

The early part of that May, as we have seen, was fine; the middle was
wet; but in the last week, at change of moon, it cleared again. A fresh
wind swept off the silver-white, deep-piled rain-clouds, bearing them,
mass on mass, to the eastern horizon, on whose verge they dwindled, and
behind whose rim they disappeared, leaving the vault behind all pure
blue space, ready for the reign of the summer sun. That sun rose broad
on Whitsuntide. The gathering of the schools was signalized by splendid
weather.

Whit-Tuesday was the great day, in preparation for which the two large
schoolrooms of Briarfield, built by the present rector, chiefly at his
own expense, were cleaned out, whitewashed, repainted, and decorated
with flowers and evergreens--some from the rectory garden, two cartloads
from Fieldhead, and a wheel-barrowful from the more stingy domain of De
Walden, the residence of Mr. Wynne. In these schoolrooms twenty tables,
each calculated to accommodate twenty guests, were laid out, surrounded
with benches, and covered with white cloths. Above them were suspended
at least some twenty cages, containing as many canaries, according to a
fancy of the district, specially cherished by Mr. Helstone's clerk, who
delighted in the piercing song of these birds, and knew that amidst
confusion of tongues they always carolled loudest. These tables, be it
understood, were not spread for the twelve hundred scholars to be
assembled from the three parishes, but only for the patrons and teachers
of the schools. The children's feast was to be spread in the open air.
At one o'clock the troops were to come in; at two they were to be
marshalled; till four they were to parade the parish; then came the
feast, and afterwards the meeting, with music and speechifying in the
church.

Why Briarfield was chosen for the point of rendezvous--the scene of the
_fête_--should be explained. It was not because it was the largest or
most populous parish--Whinbury far outdid it in that respect; nor
because it was the oldest, antique as were the hoary church and
rectory--Nunnely's low-roofed temple and mossy parsonage, buried both in
coeval oaks, outstanding sentinels of Nunnwood, were older still. It was
simply because Mr. Helstone willed it so, and Mr. Helstone's will was
stronger than that of Boultby or Hall; the former _could_ not, the
latter _would_ not, dispute a point of precedence with their resolute
and imperious brother. They let him lead and rule.

This notable anniversary had always hitherto been a trying day to
Caroline Helstone, because it dragged her perforce into public,
compelling her to face all that was wealthy, respectable, influential in
the neighbourhood; in whose presence, but for the kind countenance of
Mr. Hall, she would have appeared unsupported. Obliged to be
conspicuous; obliged to walk at the head of her regiment as the rector's
niece, and first teacher of the first class; obliged to make tea at the
first table for a mixed multitude of ladies and gentlemen, and to do all
this without the countenance of mother, aunt, or other chaperon--she,
meantime, being a nervous person, who mortally feared publicity--it will
be comprehended that, under these circumstances, she trembled at the
approach of Whitsuntide.

But this year Shirley was to be with her, and that changed the aspect of
the trial singularly--it changed it utterly. It was a trial no
longer--it was almost an enjoyment. Miss Keeldar was better in her
single self than a host of ordinary friends. Quite self-possessed, and
always spirited and easy; conscious of her social importance, yet never
presuming upon it--it would be enough to give one courage only to look
at her. The only fear was lest the heiress should not be punctual to
tryst. She often had a careless way of lingering behind time, and
Caroline knew her uncle would not wait a second for any one. At the
moment of the church clock tolling two, the bells would clash out and
the march begin. She must look after Shirley, then, in this matter, or
her expected companion would fail her.

Whit-Tuesday saw her rise almost with the sun. She, Fanny, and Eliza
were busy the whole morning arranging the rectory parlours in first-rate
company order, and setting out a collation of cooling
refreshments--wine, fruit, cakes--on the dining-room sideboard. Then she
had to dress in her freshest and fairest attire of white muslin: the
perfect fineness of the day and the solemnity of the occasion warranted,
and even exacted, such costume. Her new sash--a birthday present from
Margaret Hall, which she had reason to believe Cyril himself had bought,
and in return for which she had indeed given him a set of cambric bands
in a handsome case--was tied by the dexterous fingers of Fanny, who took
no little pleasure in arraying her fair young mistress for the occasion.
Her simple bonnet had been trimmed to correspond with her sash; her
pretty but inexpensive scarf of white crape suited her dress. When ready
she formed a picture, not bright enough to dazzle, but fair enough to
interest; not brilliantly striking, but very delicately pleasing--a
picture in which sweetness of tint, purity of air, and grace of mien
atoned for the absence of rich colouring and magnificent contour. What
her brown eye and clear forehead showed of her mind was in keeping with
her dress and face--modest, gentle, and, though pensive, harmonious. It
appeared that neither lamb nor dove need fear her, but would welcome
rather, in her look of simplicity and softness, a sympathy with their
own natures, or with the natures we ascribe to them.

After all, she was an imperfect, faulty human being, fair enough of
form, hue, and array, but, as Cyril Hall said, neither so good nor so
great as the withered Miss Ainley, now putting on her best black gown
