
"I am glad you are better."

"What besides?"

"I am glad we are friends."

"You and I?"

"Yes. I once thought we never should be."

"Cary, some day I mean to tell you a thing about myself that is not to
my credit, and consequently will not please you."

"Ah, don't! I cannot bear to think ill of you."

"And I cannot bear that you should think better of me than I deserve."

"Well, but I half know your 'thing;' indeed, I believe I know all about
it."

"You do not."

"I believe I do."

"Whom does it concern besides me?"

She coloured; she hesitated; she was silent.

"Speak, Cary! Whom does it concern?"

She tried to utter a name, and could not.

"Tell me; there is none present but ourselves. Be frank."

"But if I guess wrong?"

"I will forgive. Whisper, Cary."

He bent his ear to her lips. Still she would not, or could not, speak
clearly to the point. Seeing that Moore waited and was resolved to hear
something, she at last said, "Miss Keeldar spent a day at the rectory
about a week since. The evening came on very wintry, and we persuaded
her to stay all night."

"And you and she curled your hair together?"

"How do you know that?"

"And then you chattered, and she told you----"

"It was not at curling-hair time, so you are not as wise as you think;
and, besides, she didn't tell me."

"You slept together afterwards?"

"We occupied the same room and bed. We did not sleep much; we talked the
whole night through."

"I'll be sworn you did! And then it all came out--_tant pis_. I would
rather you had heard it from myself."

"You are quite wrong. She did not tell me what you suspect--she is not
the person to proclaim such things; but yet I inferred something from
parts of her discourse. I gathered more from rumour, and I made out the
rest by instinct."

"But if she did not tell you that I wanted to marry her for the sake of
her money, and that she refused me indignantly and scornfully (you need
neither start nor blush; nor yet need you prick your trembling fingers
with your needle. That is the plain truth, whether you like it or
not)--if such was not the subject of her august confidences, on what
point did they turn? You say you talked the whole night through; what
about?"

"About things we never thoroughly discussed before, intimate friends as
we have been; but you hardly expect I should tell you?"

"Yes, yes, Cary; you will tell me. You said we were friends, and friends
should always confide in each other."

"But you are sure you won't repeat it?"

"Quite sure."

"Not to Louis?"

"Not even to Louis. What does Louis care for young ladies' secrets?"

"Robert, Shirley is a curious, magnanimous being."

"I dare say. I can imagine there are both odd points and grand points
about her."

"I have found her chary in showing her feelings; but when they rush out,
river-like, and pass full and powerful before you--almost without leave
from her--you gaze, wonder; you admire, and--I think--love her."

"You saw this spectacle?"

"Yes; at dead of night, when all the house was silent, and starlight and
the cold reflection from the snow glimmered in our chamber, then I saw
Shirley's heart."

"Her heart's core? Do you think she showed you that?"

"Her heart's core."

"And how was it?"

"Like a shrine, for it was holy; like snow, for it was pure; like
flame, for it was warm; like death, for it was strong."

"Can she love? tell me that."

"What think you?"

"She has loved none that have loved her yet."

"Who are those that have loved her?"

He named a list of gentlemen, closing with Sir Philip Nunnely.

"She has loved none of these."

"Yet some of them were worthy of a woman's affection."

"Of some women's, but not of Shirley's."

"Is she better than others of her sex?"

"She is peculiar, and more dangerous to take as a wife--rashly."

"I can imagine that."

"She spoke of you----"

"Oh, she did! I thought you denied it."

"She did not speak in the way you fancy; but I asked her, and I would
make her tell me what she thought of you, or rather how she felt towards
you. I wanted to know; I had long wanted to know."

"So had I; but let us hear. She thinks meanly, she feels contemptuously,
doubtless?"

"She thinks of you almost as highly as a woman can think of a man. You
know she can be eloquent. I yet feel in fancy the glow of the language
in which her opinion was conveyed."

"But how does she feel?"

"Till you shocked her (she said you had shocked her, but she would not
tell me how) she felt as a sister feels towards a brother of whom she is
at once fond and proud."

"I'll shock her no more, Cary, for the shock rebounded on myself till I
staggered again. But that comparison about sister and brother is all
nonsense. She is too rich and proud to entertain fraternal sentiments
for me."

"You don't know her, Robert; and, somehow, I fancy now (I had other
ideas formerly) that you cannot know her. You and she are not so
constructed as to be able thoroughly to understand each other."

"It may be so. I esteem her, I admire her; and yet my impressions
concerning her are harsh--perhaps uncharitable. I believe, for instance,
that she is incapable of love----"

"Shirley incapable of love!"

"That she will never marry. I imagine her jealous of compromising her
pride, of relinquishing her power, of sharing her property."

"Shirley has hurt your _amour propre_."

"She did hurt it; though I had not an emotion of tenderness, nor a spark
of passion for her."

"Then, Robert, it was very wicked in you to want to marry her."

"And very mean, my little pastor, my pretty priestess. I never wanted to
kiss Miss Keeldar in my life, though she has fine lips, scarlet and
round as ripe cherries; or, if I did wish it, it was the mere desire of
the eye."

"I doubt, now, whether you are speaking the truth. The grapes or the
cherries are sour--'hung too high.'"

"She has a pretty figure, a pretty face, beautiful hair. I acknowledge
all her charms and feel none of them, or only feel them in a way she
would disdain. I suppose I was truly tempted by the mere gilding of the
bait. Caroline, what a noble fellow your Robert is--great, good,
disinterested, and then so pure!"

"But not perfect. He made a great blunder once, and we will hear no more
about it."

"And shall we think no more about it, Cary? Shall we not despise him in
our heart--gentle but just, compassionate but upright?"

"Never! We will remember that with what measure we mete it shall be
measured unto us, and so we will give no scorn, only affection."

"Which won't satisfy, I warn you of that. Something besides
affection--something far stronger, sweeter, warmer--will be demanded one
day. Is it there to give?"

Caroline was moved, much moved.

"Be calm, Lina," said Moore soothingly. "I have no intention, because I
have no right, to perturb your mind now, nor for months to come. Don't
look as if you would leave me. We will make no more agitating allusions;
we will resume our gossip. Do not tremble; look me in the face. See what
a poor, pale, grim phantom I am--more pitiable than formidable."

She looked shyly. "There is something formidable still, pale as you
are," she said, as her eye fell under his.

"To return to Shirley," pursued Moore: "is it your opinion that she is
ever likely to marry?"

"She loves."

"Platonically--theoretically--all humbug!"

"She loves what I call sincerely."

"Did she say so?"

"I cannot affirm that she said so. No such confession as 'I love this
man or that' passed her lips."

"I thought not."

"But the feeling made its way in spite of her, and I saw it. She spoke
of one man in a strain not to be misunderstood. Her voice alone was
sufficient testimony. Having wrung from her an opinion on your
character, I demanded a second opinion of--another person about whom I
had my conjectures, though they were the most tangled and puzzled
conjectures in the world. I would _make_ her speak. I shook her, I chid
her, I pinched her fingers when she tried to put me off with gibes and
jests in her queer provoking way, and at last out it came. The voice, I
say, was enough; hardly raised above a whisper, and yet such a soft
vehemence in its tones. There was no confession, no confidence, in the
matter. To these things she cannot condescend; but I am sure that man's
happiness is dear to her as her own life."

"Who is it?"

"I charged her with the fact. She did not deny, she did not avow, but
looked at me. I saw her eyes by the snow-gleam. It was quite enough. I
triumphed over her mercilessly."

"What right had _you_ to triumph? Do you mean to say _you_ are fancy
free?"

"Whatever _I_ am, Shirley is a bondswoman. Lioness, she has found her
captor. Mistress she may be of all round her, but her own mistress she
is not."

"So you exulted at recognizing a fellow-slave in one so fair and
imperial?"

"I did; Robert, you say right, in one so fair and imperial."

"You confess it--a _fellow_-slave?"

"I confess nothing; but I say that haughty Shirley is no more free than
was Hagar."

"And who, pray, is the Abraham, the hero of a patriarch who has achieved
such a conquest?"

"You still speak scornfully, and cynically, and sorely; but I will make
you change your note before I have done with you."

"We will see that. Can she marry this Cupidon?"

"Cupidon! he is just about as much a Cupidon as you are a Cyclops."

"Can she marry him?"

"You will see."

"I want to know his name, Cary."

"Guess it."

"Is it any one in this neighbourhood?"

"Yes, in Briarfield parish."

"Then it is some person unworthy of her. I don't know a soul in
Briarfield parish her equal."

"Guess."

"Impossible. I suppose she is under a delusion, and will plunge into
some absurdity, after all."

Caroline smiled.

"Do _you_ approve the choice?" asked Moore.

"Quite, _quite_."

"Then I _am_ puzzled; for the head which owns this bounteous fall of
hazel curls is an excellent little thinking machine, most accurate in
its working. It boasts a correct, steady judgment, inherited from
'mamma,' I suppose."

"And I _quite_ approve, and mamma was charmed."

"'Mamma' charmed--Mrs. Pryor! It can't be romantic, then?"

"It _is_ romantic, but it is also right."

"Tell me, Cary--tell me out of pity; I am too weak to be tantalized."

"You shall be tantalized--it will do you no harm; you are not so weak as
you pretend."

"I have twice this evening had some thoughts of falling on the floor at
your feet."

"You had better not. I shall decline to help you up."

"And worshipping you downright. My mother was a Roman Catholic. You look
like the loveliest of her pictures of the Virgin. I think I will embrace
her faith and kneel and adore."

"Robert, Robert, sit still; don't be absurd. I will go to Hortense if
you commit extravagances."

"You have stolen my senses. Just now nothing will come into my mind but
_les litanies de la sainte Vièrge. Rose céleste, reine des anges_!"

"_Tour d'ivoire, maison d'or_--is not that the jargon? Well, sit down
quietly, and guess your riddle."

"But 'mamma' charmed--there's the puzzle."

"I'll tell you what mamma said when I told her. 'Depend upon it, my
dear, such a choice will make the happiness of Miss Keeldar's life.'"

"I'll guess once, and no more. It is old Helstone. She is going to be
your aunt."

"I'll tell my uncle; I'll tell Shirley!" cried Caroline, laughing
gleefully. "Guess again, Robert; your blunders are charming."

"It is the parson--Hall."

"Indeed, no; he is mine, if you please."

"Yours! Ay, the whole generation of women in Briarfield seem to have
made an idol of that priest. I wonder why; he is bald, sand-blind,
gray-haired."

"Fanny will be here to fetch me before you have solved the riddle, if
you don't make haste."

"I'll guess no more--I am tired; and then I don't care. Miss Keeldar may
marry _le grand Turc_ for me."

"Must I whisper?"

"That you must, and quickly. Here comes Hortense; come near, a little
nearer, my own Lina. I care for the whisper more than the words."

She whispered. Robert gave a start, a flash of the eye, a brief laugh.
Miss Moore entered, and Sarah followed behind, with information that
Fanny was come. The hour of converse was over.

Robert found a moment to exchange a few more whispered sentences. He was
waiting at the foot of the staircase as Caroline descended after putting
on her shawl.

"Must I call Shirley a noble creature now?" he asked.

"If you wish to speak the truth, certainly."

"Must I forgive her?"

"Forgive her? Naughty Robert! Was she in the wrong, or were you?"

"Must I at length love her downright, Cary?"

Caroline looked keenly up, and made a movement towards him, something
between the loving and the petulant.

"Only give the word, and I'll try to obey you."

"Indeed, you must not love her; the bare idea is perverse."

"But then she is handsome, peculiarly handsome. Hers is a beauty that
grows on you. You think her but graceful when you first see her; you
discover her to be beautiful when you have known her for a year."

"It is not you who are to say these things. Now, Robert, be good."

"O Cary, I have no love to give. Were the goddess of beauty to woo me, I
could not meet her advances. There is no heart which I can call mine in
this breast."

"So much the better; you are a great deal safer without. Good-night."

"Why must you always go, Lina, at the very instant when I most want you
to stay?"

"Because you most wish to retain when you are most certain to lose."

"Listen; one other word. Take care of your own heart--do you hear me?"

"There is no danger."

"I am not convinced of that. The Platonic parson, for instance."

"Who--Malone?"

"Cyril Hall. I owe more than one twinge of jealousy to that quarter."

"As to you, you have been flirting with Miss Mann. She showed me the
other day a plant you had given her.--Fanny, I am ready."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

WRITTEN IN THE SCHOOLROOM.


Louis Moore's doubts respecting the immediate evacuation of Fieldhead by
Mr. Sympson turned out to be perfectly well founded. The very next day
after the grand quarrel about Sir Philip Nunnely a sort of
reconciliation was patched up between uncle and niece. Shirley, who
could never find it in her heart to be or to seem inhospitable (except
in the single instance of Mr. Donne), begged the whole party to stay a
little longer. She begged in such earnest it was evident she wished it
for some reason. They took her at her word. Indeed, the uncle could not
bring himself to leave her quite unwatched--at full liberty to marry
Robert Moore as soon as that gentleman should be able (Mr. Sympson
piously prayed this might never be the case) to reassert his supposed
pretensions to her hand. They all stayed.

In his first rage against all the house of Moore, Mr. Sympson had so
conducted himself towards Mr. Louis that that gentleman--patient of
labour or suffering, but intolerant of coarse insolence--had promptly
resigned his post, and could now be induced to resume and retain it only
till such time as the family should quit Yorkshire. Mrs. Sympson's
entreaties prevailed with him thus far; his own attachment to his pupil
constituted an additional motive for concession; and probably he had a
third motive, stronger than either of the other two. Probably he would
have found it very hard indeed to leave Fieldhead just now.

Things went on for some time pretty smoothly. Miss Keeldar's health was
re-established; her spirits resumed their flow. Moore had found means to
relieve her from every nervous apprehension; and, indeed, from the
moment of giving him her confidence, every fear seemed to have taken
wing. Her heart became as lightsome, her manner as careless, as those of
a little child, that, thoughtless of its own life or death, trusts all
responsibility to its parents. He and William Farren--through whose
medium he made inquiries concerning the state of Phœbe--agreed in
asserting that the dog was not mad, that it was only ill-usage which had
driven her from home; for it was proved that her master was in the
frequent habit of chastising her violently. Their assertion might or
might not be true. The groom and gamekeeper affirmed to the
contrary--both asserting that, if hers was not a clear case of
hydrophobia, there was no such disease. But to this evidence Louis Moore
turned an incredulous ear. He reported to Shirley only what was
encouraging. She believed him; and, right or wrong, it is certain that
in her case the bite proved innocuous.

November passed; December came. The Sympsons were now really departing.
It was incumbent on them to be at home by Christmas. Their packages were
preparing; they were to leave in a few days. One winter evening, during
the last week of their stay, Louis Moore again took out his little blank
book, and discoursed with it as follows:--

       *       *       *       *       *

"She is lovelier than ever. Since that little cloud was dispelled all
the temporary waste and wanness have vanished. It was marvellous to see
how soon the magical energy of youth raised her elastic and revived her
blooming.

"After breakfast this morning, when I had seen her, and listened to her,
and, so to speak, felt her, in every sentient atom of my frame, I passed
from her sunny presence into the chill drawing-room. Taking up a little
gilt volume, I found it to contain a selection of lyrics. I read a poem
or two; whether the spell was in me or in the verse I know not, but my
heart filled genially, my pulse rose. I glowed, notwithstanding the
frost air. I, too, am young as yet. Though she said she never considered
me young, I am barely thirty. There are moments when life, for no other
reason than my own youth, beams with sweet hues upon me.

"It was time to go to the schoolroom. I went. That same schoolroom is
rather pleasant in a morning. The sun then shines through the low
lattice; the books are in order; there are no papers strewn about; the
fire is clear and clean; no cinders have fallen, no ashes accumulated. I
found Henry there, and he had brought with him Miss Keeldar. They were
together.

"I said she was lovelier than ever. She is. A fine rose, not deep but
delicate, opens on her cheek. Her eye, always dark, clear, and speaking,
utters now a language I cannot render; it is the utterance, seen not
heard, through which angels must have communed when there was 'silence
in heaven.' Her hair was always dusk as night and fine as silk, her neck
was always fair, flexible, polished; but both have now a new charm. The
tresses are soft as shadow, the shoulders they fall on wear a goddess
grace. Once I only _saw_ her beauty, now I _feel_ it.

"Henry was repeating his lesson to her before bringing it to me. One of
her hands was occupied with the book; he held the other. That boy gets
more than his share of privileges; he dares caress and is caressed. What
indulgence and compassion she shows him! Too much. If this went on,
Henry in a few years, when his soul was formed, would offer it on her
altar, as I have offered mine.

"I saw her eyelid flitter when I came in, but she did not look up; _now_
she hardly ever gives me a glance. She seems to grow silent too; to _me_
she rarely speaks, and when I am present, she says little to others. In
my gloomy moments I attribute this change to indifference, aversion,
what not? In my sunny intervals I give it another meaning. I say, were I
her equal, I could find in this shyness coyness, and in that coyness
love. As it is, dare I look for it? What could I do with it if found?

"This morning I dared at least contrive an hour's communion for her and
me; I dared not only _wish_ but _will_ an interview with her. I dared
summon solitude to guard us. Very decidedly I called Henry to the door.
Without hesitation I said, 'Go where you will, my boy; but, till I call
you, return not here.'

"Henry, I could see, did not like his dismissal. That boy is young, but
a thinker; his meditative eye shines on me strangely sometimes. He half
feels what links me to Shirley; he half guesses that there is a dearer
delight in the reserve with which I am treated than in all the
endearments he is allowed. The young, lame, half-grown lion would growl
at me now and then, because I have tamed his lioness and am her keeper,
did not the habit of discipline and the instinct of affection hold him
subdued. Go, Henry; you must learn to take your share of the bitter of
life with all of Adam's race that have gone before or will come after
you. Your destiny can be no exception to the common lot; be grateful
that your love is overlooked thus early, before it can claim any
affinity to passion. An hour's fret, a pang of envy, suffice to express
what you feel. Jealousy hot as the sun above the line, rage destructive
as the tropic storm, the clime of your sensations ignores--as yet.

"I took my usual seat at the desk, quite in my usual way. I am blessed
in that power to cover all inward ebullition with outward calm. No one
who looks at my slow face can guess the vortex sometimes whirling in my
heart, and engulfing thought and wrecking prudence. Pleasant is it to
have the gift to proceed peacefully and powerfully in your course
without alarming by one eccentric movement. It was not my present
intention to utter one word of love to her, or to reveal one glimpse of
the fire in which I wasted. Presumptuous I never have been; presumptuous
I never will be. Rather than even _seem_ selfish and interested, I would
resolutely rise, gird my loins, part and leave her, and seek, on the
other side of the globe, a new life, cold and barren as the rock the
salt tide daily washes. My design this morning was to take of her a near
scrutiny--to read a line in the page of her heart. Before I left I
determined to know _what_ I was leaving.

"I had some quills to make into pens. Most men's hands would have
trembled when their hearts were so stirred; mine went to work steadily,
and my voice, when I called it into exercise, was firm.

"'This day week you will be alone at Fieldhead, Miss Keeldar.'

"'Yes: I rather think my uncle's intention to go is a settled one now.'

"'He leaves you dissatisfied.'

"'He is not pleased with me.'

"'He departs as he came--no better for his journey. This is mortifying.'

"'I trust the failure of his plans will take from him all inclination to
lay new ones.'

"'In his way Mr. Sympson honestly wished you well. All he has done or
intended to do he believed to be for the best.'

"'You are kind to undertake the defence of a man who has permitted
himself to treat you with so much insolence.'

"'I never feel shocked at, or bear malice for, what is spoken in
character; and most perfectly in character was that vulgar and violent
onset against me, when he had quitted you worsted.'

"'You cease now to be Henry's tutor?'

"'I shall be parted from Henry for a while (if he and I live we shall
meet again somehow, for we love each other) and be ousted from the bosom
of the Sympson family for ever. Happily this change does not leave me
stranded; it but hurries into premature execution designs long formed.'

"'No change finds you off your guard. I was sure, in your calm way, you
would be prepared for sudden mutation. I always think you stand in the
world like a solitary but watchful, thoughtful archer in a wood. And the
quiver on your shoulder holds more arrows than one; your bow is provided
with a second string. Such too is your brother's wont. You two might go
forth homeless hunters to the loneliest western wilds; all would be well
with you. The hewn tree would make you a hut, the cleared forest yield
you fields from its stripped bosom, the buffalo would feel your
rifle-shot, and with lowered horns and hump pay homage at your feet.'

"'And any Indian tribe of Blackfeet or Flatheads would afford us a
bride, perhaps?'

"'No' (hesitating), 'I think not. The savage is sordid. I think--that
is, I _hope_--you would neither of you share your hearth with that to
which you could not give your heart.'

"'What suggested the wild West to your mind, Miss Keeldar? Have you been
with me in spirit when I did not see you? Have you entered into my
day-dreams, and beheld my brain labouring at its scheme of a future?'

"She had separated a slip of paper for lighting tapers--a spill, as it
is called--into fragments. She threw morsel by morsel into the fire, and
stood pensively watching them consume. She did not speak.

"'How did you learn what you seem to know about my intentions?'

"'I know nothing. I am only discovering them now. I spoke at hazard.'

"'Your hazard sounds like divination. A tutor I will never be again;
never take a pupil after Henry and yourself; not again will I sit
habitually at another man's table--no more be the appendage of a family.
I am now a man of thirty; I have never been free since I was a boy of
ten. I have such a thirst for freedom, such a deep passion to know her
and call her mine, such a day-desire and night-longing to win her and
possess her, I will not refuse to cross the Atlantic for her sake; her I
will follow deep into virgin woods. Mine it shall not be to accept a
savage girl as a slave--she could not be a wife. I know no white woman
whom I love that would accompany me; but I am certain Liberty will await
me, sitting under a pine. When I call her she will come to my loghouse,
and she shall fill my arms.'

"She could not hear me speak so unmoved, and she _was_ moved. It was
right--I meant to move her. She could not answer me, nor could she look
at me. I should have been sorry if she could have done either. Her cheek
glowed as if a crimson flower through whose petals the sun shone had
cast its light upon it. On the white lid and dark lashes of her downcast
eye trembled all that is graceful in the sense of half-painful,
half-pleasing shame.

"Soon she controlled her emotion, and took all her feelings under
command. I saw she had felt insurrection, and was waking to empire. She
sat down. There was that in her face which I could read. It said, I see
the line which is my limit; nothing shall make me pass it. I feel--I
know how far I may reveal my feelings, and when I must clasp the volume.
I have advanced to a certain distance, as far as the true and sovereign
and undegraded nature of my kind permits; now here I stand rooted. My
heart may break if it is baffled; let it break. It shall never dishonour
me; it shall never dishonour my sisterhood in me. Suffering before
degradation! death before treachery!

"I, for my part, said, 'If she were poor, I would be at her feet; if she
were lowly, I would take her in my arms. Her gold and her station are
two griffins that guard her on each side. Love looks and longs, and
dares not; Passion hovers round, and is kept at bay; Truth and Devotion
are scared. There is nothing to lose in winning her, no sacrifice to
make. It is all clear gain, and therefore unimaginably difficult.'

"Difficult or not, something must be done, something must be said. I
could not, and would not, sit silent with all that beauty modestly mute
in my presence. I spoke thus, and still I spoke with calm. Quiet as my
words were, I could hear they fell in a tone distinct, round, and deep.

"'Still, I know I shall be strangely placed with that mountain nymph
Liberty. She is, I suspect, akin to that Solitude which I once wooed,
and from which I now seek a divorce. These Oreads are peculiar. They
come upon you with an unearthly charm, like some starlight evening; they
inspire a wild but not warm delight; their beauty is the beauty of
spirits; their grace is not the grace of life, but of seasons or scenes
in nature. Theirs is the dewy bloom of morning, the languid flush of
evening, the peace of the moon, the changefulness of clouds. I want and
will have something different. This elfish splendour looks chill to my
vision, and feels frozen to my touch. I am not a poet; I cannot live
with abstractions. You, Miss Keeldar, have sometimes, in your laughing
satire, called me a material philosopher, and implied that I live
sufficiently for the substantial. Certainly I feel material from head to
foot; and glorious as Nature is, and deeply as I worship her with the
solid powers of a solid heart, I would rather behold her through the
soft human eyes of a loved and lovely wife than through the wild orbs of
the highest goddess of Olympus.'

"'Juno could not cook a buffalo steak as you like it,' said she.

"'She could not; but I will tell you who could--some young, penniless,
friendless orphan girl. I wish I could find such a one--pretty enough
for me to love, with something of the mind and heart suited to my taste;
not uneducated--honest and modest. I care nothing for attainments, but I
would fain have the germ of those sweet natural powers which nothing
acquired can rival; any temper Fate wills--I can manage the hottest. To
such a creature as this I should like to be first tutor and then
husband. I would teach her my language, my habits and my principles, and
then I would reward her with my love.'

"'_Reward_ her, lord of the creation--_reward_ her!'" ejaculated she,
with a curled lip.

"'And be repaid a thousandfold.'

"'If she willed it, monseigneur.'

"'And she _should_ will it.'

"'You have stipulated for any temper Fate wills. Compulsion is flint and
a blow to the metal of some souls.'

"'And love the spark it elicits.'

"'Who cares for the love that is but a spark--seen, flown upward, and
gone?'

"'I must find my orphan girl. Tell me how, Miss Keeldar.'

"'Advertise; and be sure you add, when you describe the qualifications,
she must be a good plain cook.'

"'I must find her; and when I do find her I shall marry her.'

"'Not you!' and her voice took a sudden accent of peculiar scorn.

"I liked this. I had roused her from the pensive mood in which I had
first found her. I would stir her further.

"'Why doubt it?'

"'_You_ marry!'

"'Yes, of course; nothing more evident than that I can and shall.'

"'The contrary is evident, Mr. Moore.'

"She charmed me in this mood--waxing disdainful, half insulting; pride,
temper, derision, blent in her large fine eye, that had just now the
look of a merlin's.

"'Favour me with your reasons for such an opinion, Miss Keeldar.'

"'How will _you_ manage to marry, I wonder?'

"'I shall manage it with ease and speed when I find the proper person.'

"'Accept celibacy!' (and she made a gesture with her hand as if she gave
me something) 'take it as your doom!'

"'No; you cannot give what I already have. Celibacy has been mine for
thirty years. If you wish to offer me a gift, a parting present, a
keepsake, you must change the boon.'

"'Take worse, then!'

"'How--what?'

"I now felt, and looked, and spoke eagerly. I was unwise to quit my
sheet-anchor of calm even for an instant; it deprived me of an advantage
and transferred it to her. The little spark of temper dissolved in
sarcasm, and eddied over her countenance in the ripples of a mocking
smile.

"'Take a wife that has paid you court to save your modesty, and thrust
herself upon you to spare your scruples.'

"'Only show me where.'

"'Any stout widow that has had a few husbands already, and can manage
these things.'

"'She must not be rich, then. Oh these riches!'

"'Never would you have gathered the produce of the gold-bearing garden.
You have not courage to confront the sleepless dragon; you have not
craft to borrow the aid of Atlas.'

"'You look hot and haughty.'

"'And you far haughtier. Yours is the monstrous pride which counterfeits
humility.'

"'I am a dependant; I know my place.'

"'I am a woman; I know mine.'

"'I am poor; I must be proud.'

"'I have received ordinances, and own obligations stringent as yours.'

"We had reached a critical point now, and we halted and looked at each
other. _She_ would not give in, I felt. Beyond this I neither felt nor
saw. A few moments yet were mine. The end was coming--I heard its
rush--but not come. I would dally, wait, talk, and when impulse urged I
would act. I am never in a hurry; I never was in a hurry in my whole
life. Hasty people drink the nectar of existence scalding hot; I taste
it cool as dew. I proceeded: 'Apparently, Miss Keeldar, you are as
little likely to marry as myself. I know you have refused three--nay,
four--advantageous offers, and, I believe, a fifth. Have you rejected
Sir Philip Nunnely?'

"I put this question suddenly and promptly.

"'Did you think I should take him?'

"'I thought you might.'

"'On what grounds, may I ask?'

"'Conformity of rank, age, pleasing contrast of temper--for _he_ is mild
and amiable--harmony of intellectual tastes.'

"'A beautiful sentence! Let us take it to pieces. "Conformity of rank."
He is quite above me. Compare my grange with his palace, if you please.
I am disdained by his kith and kin. "Suitability of age." We were born
in the same year; consequently he is still a boy, while I am a
woman--ten years his senior to all intents and purposes. "Contrast of
temper." Mild and amiable, is he; I--what? Tell me.'

"'Sister of the spotted, bright, quick, fiery leopard.'

"'And you would mate me with a kid--the millennium being yet millions of
centuries from mankind; being yet, indeed, an archangel high in the
seventh heaven, uncommissioned to descend? Unjust barbarian! "Harmony of
intellectual tastes." He is fond of poetry, and I hate it----'

"'Do you? That is news.'

"'I absolutely shudder at the sight of metre or at the sound of rhyme
whenever I am at the priory or Sir Philip at Fieldhead. Harmony,
indeed! When did I whip up syllabub sonnets or string stanzas fragile as
fragments of glass? and when did I betray a belief that those
penny-beads were genuine brilliants?'

"'You might have the satisfaction of leading him to a higher standard,
of improving his tastes.'

"'Leading and improving! teaching and tutoring! bearing and forbearing!
Pah! my husband is not to be my baby. I am not to set him his daily
lesson and see that he learns it, and give him a sugar-plum if he is
good, and a patient, pensive, pathetic lecture if he is bad. But it is
like a tutor to talk of the "satisfaction of teaching." I suppose _you_
think it the finest employment in the world. I don't. I reject it.
Improving a husband! No. I shall insist upon my husband improving me, or
else we part.'

"'God knows it is needed!'

"'What do you mean by that, Mr. Moore?'

"'What I say. Improvement is imperatively needed.'

"'If you were a woman you would school _monsieur, votre mari_,
charmingly. It would just suit you; schooling is your vocation.'

"'May I ask whether, in your present just and gentle mood, you mean to
taunt me with being a tutor?'

"'Yes, bitterly; and with anything else you please--any defect of which
you are painfully conscious.'

"'With being poor, for instance?'

"'Of course; that will sting you. You are sore about your poverty; you
brood over that.'

"'With having nothing but a very plain person to offer the woman who may
master my heart?'

"'Exactly. You have a habit of calling yourself plain. You are sensitive
about the cut of your features because they are not quite on an Apollo
pattern. You abase them more than is needful, in the faint hope that
others may say a word in their behalf--which won't happen. Your face is
nothing to boast of, certainly--not a pretty line nor a pretty tint to
be found therein.'

"'Compare it with your own.'

"'It looks like a god of Egypt--a great sand-buried stone head; or
rather I will compare it to nothing so lofty. It looks like Tartar. You
are my mastiff's cousin. I think you as much like him as a man can be
like a dog.'

"'Tartar is your dear companion. In summer, when you rise early, and
run out into the fields to wet your feet with the dew, and freshen your
cheek and uncurl your hair with the breeze, you always call him to
follow you. You call him sometimes with a whistle that you learned from
me. In the solitude of your wood, when you think nobody but Tartar is
listening, you whistle the very tunes you imitated from my lips, or sing
the very songs you have caught up by ear from my voice. I do not ask
whence flows the feeling which you pour into these songs, for I know it
flows out of your heart, Miss Keeldar. In the winter evenings Tartar
lies at your feet. You suffer him to rest his head on your perfumed lap;
you let him couch on the borders of your satin raiment. His rough hide
is familiar with the contact of your hand. I once saw you kiss him on
that snow-white beauty spot which stars his broad forehead. It is
dangerous to say I am like Tartar; it suggests to me a claim to be
treated like Tartar.'

"'Perhaps, sir, you can extort as much from your penniless and
friendless young orphan girl, when you find her.'

"'Oh could I find her such as I image her! Something to tame first, and
teach afterwards; to break in, and then to fondle. To lift the destitute
proud thing out of poverty; to establish power over and then to be
indulgent to the capricious moods that never were influenced and never
indulged before; to see her alternately irritated and subdued about
twelve times in the twenty-four hours; and perhaps, eventually, when her
training was accomplished, to behold her the exemplary and patient
mother of about a dozen children, only now and then lending little Louis
a cordial cuff by way of paying the interest of the vast debt she owes
his father. Oh' (I went on), 'my orphan girl would give me many a kiss;
she would watch on the threshold for my coming home of an evening; she
would run into my arms; she would keep my hearth as bright as she would
make it warm. God bless the sweet idea! Find her I must.'

"Her eyes emitted an eager flash, her lips opened; but she reclosed
them, and impetuously turned away.

"'Tell me, tell me where she is, Miss Keeldar!'

"Another movement, all haughtiness and fire and impulse.

"'I must know. You _can_ tell me; you _shall_ tell me.'

"'I _never will_.'

"She turned to leave me. Could I now let her part as she had always
parted from me? No. I had gone too far not to finish; I had come too
near the end not to drive home to it. All the encumbrance of doubt, all
the rubbish of indecision, must be removed at once, and the plain truth
must be ascertained. She must take her part, and tell me what it was; I
must take mine and adhere to it.

"'A minute, madam,' I said, keeping my hand on the door-handle before I
opened it. 'We have had a long conversation this morning, but the last
word has not been spoken yet. It is yours to speak it.'

"'May I pass?'

"'No; I guard the door. I would almost rather die than let you leave me
just now, without speaking the word I demand.'

"'What dare you expect me to say?'

"'What I am dying and perishing to hear; what I _must_ and _will_ hear;
what you dare not now suppress.'

"'Mr. Moore, I hardly know what you mean. You are not like yourself.'

"I suppose I hardly was like my usual self, for I scared her--that I
could see. It was right: she must be scared to be won.

"'You _do_ know what I mean, and for the first time I stand before you
_myself_. I have flung off the tutor, and beg to introduce you to the
man. And remember, he is a gentleman.'

"She trembled. She put her hand to mine as if to remove it from the
lock. She might as well have tried to loosen, by her soft touch, metal
welded to metal. She felt she was powerless, and receded; and again she
trembled.

"What change I underwent I cannot explain, but out of her emotion passed
into me a new spirit. I neither was crushed nor elated by her lands and
gold; I thought not of them, cared not for them. They were
nothing--dross that could not dismay me. I saw only herself--her young
beautiful form, the grace, the majesty, the modesty of her girlhood.

"'My pupil,' I said.

"'My master,' was the low answer.

"'I have a thing to tell you.'

"She waited with declined brow and ringlets drooped.

"'I have to tell you that for four years you have been growing into
your tutor's heart, and that you are rooted there now. I have to declare
that you have bewitched me, in spite of sense, and experience, and
difference of station and estate. You have so looked, and spoken, and
moved; so shown me your faults and your virtues--beauties rather, they
are hardly so stern as virtues--that I love you--love you with my life
and strength. It is out now.'

"She sought what to say, but could not find a word. She tried to rally,
but vainly. I passionately repeated that I loved her.

"'Well, Mr. Moore, what then?' was the answer I got, uttered in a tone
that would have been petulant if it had not faltered.

"'Have you nothing to say to me? Have you no love for me?'

"'A little bit.'

"'I am not to be tortured. I will not even play at present.'

"'I don't want to play; I want to go.'
