anywhere in the world; now the cloud had passed from her mien, leaving
space for the dawn of hope and interest, and those feelings rose like a
clear morning, animating what had been depressed, tinting what had been
pale. Her eyes, whose colour I had not at first known, so dim were they
with repressed tears, so shadowed with ceaseless dejection, now, lit by
a ray of the sunshine that cheered her heart, revealed irids of bright
hazel--irids large and full, screened with long lashes; and pupils
instinct with fire. That look of wan emaciation which anxiety or low
spirits often communicates to a thoughtful, thin face, rather long than
round, having vanished from hers, a clearness of skin almost bloom,
and a plumpness almost embonpoint, softened the decided lines of
her features. Her figure shared in this beneficial change; it became
rounder, and as the harmony of her form was complete and her stature of
the graceful middle height, one did not regret (or at least I did not
regret) the absence of confirmed fulness, in contours, still slight,
though compact, elegant, flexible--the exquisite turning of waist,
wrist, hand, foot, and ankle satisfied completely my notions of
symmetry, and allowed a lightness and freedom of movement which
corresponded with my ideas of grace.

Thus improved, thus wakened to life, Mdlle. Henri began to take a
new footing in the school; her mental power, manifested gradually but
steadily, ere long extorted recognition even from the envious; and when
the young and healthy saw that she could smile brightly, converse gaily,
move with vivacity and alertness, they acknowledged in her a sisterhood
of youth and health, and tolerated her as of their kind accordingly.

To speak truth, I watched this change much as a gardener watches the
growth of a precious plant, and I contributed to it too, even as the
said gardener contributes to the development of his favourite. To me it
was not difficult to discover how I could best foster my pupil, cherish
her starved feelings, and induce the outward manifestation of that
inward vigour which sunless drought and blighting blast had hitherto
forbidden to expand. Constancy of attention--a kindness as mute
as watchful, always standing by her, cloaked in the rough garb of
austerity, and making its real nature known only by a rare glance of
interest, or a cordial and gentle word; real respect masked with seeming
imperiousness, directing, urging her actions, yet helping her too, and
that with devoted care: these were the means I used, for these means
best suited Frances' feelings, as susceptible as deep vibrating--her
nature at once proud and shy.

The benefits of my system became apparent also in her altered demeanour
as a teacher; she now took her place amongst her pupils with an air
of spirit and firmness which assured them at once that she meant to be
obeyed--and obeyed she was. They felt they had lost their power over
her. If any girl had rebelled, she would no longer have taken her
rebellion to heart; she possessed a source of comfort they could not
drain, a pillar of support they could not overthrow: formerly, when
insulted, she wept; now, she smiled.

The public reading of one of her devoirs achieved the revelation of her
talents to all and sundry; I remember the subject--it was an emigrant's
letter to his friends at home. It opened with simplicity; some natural
and graphic touches disclosed to the reader the scene of virgin forest
and great, New-World river--barren of sail and flag--amidst which the
epistle was supposed to be indited. The difficulties and dangers that
attend a settler's life, were hinted at; and in the few words said on
that subject, Mdlle. Henri failed not to render audible the voice of
resolve, patience, endeavour. The disasters which had driven him
from his native country were alluded to; stainless honour, inflexible
independence, indestructible self-respect there took the word. Past
days were spoken of; the grief of parting, the regrets of absence, were
touched upon; feeling, forcible and fine, breathed eloquent in every
period. At the close, consolation was suggested; religious faith became
there the speaker, and she spoke well.

The devoir was powerfully written in language at once chaste and choice,
in a style nerved with vigour and graced with harmony.

Mdlle. Reuter was quite sufficiently acquainted with English to
understand it when read or spoken in her presence, though she could
neither speak nor write it herself. During the perusal of this devoir,
she sat placidly busy, her eyes and fingers occupied with the formation
of a "riviere" or open-work hem round a cambric handkerchief; she
said nothing, and her face and forehead, clothed with a mask of purely
negative expression, were as blank of comment as her lips. As neither
surprise, pleasure, approbation, nor interest were evinced in her
countenance, so no more were disdain, envy, annoyance, weariness; if
that inscrutable mien said anything, it was simply this--

"The matter is too trite to excite an emotion, or call forth an
opinion."

As soon as I had done, a hum rose; several of the pupils, pressing round
Mdlle. Henri, began to beset her with compliments; the composed voice of
the directress was now heard:--

"Young ladies, such of you as have cloaks and umbrellas will hasten
to return home before the shower becomes heavier" (it was raining a
little), "the remainder will wait till their respective servants arrive
to fetch them." And the school dispersed, for it was four o'clock.

"Monsieur, a word," said Mdlle. Reuter, stepping on to the estrade, and
signifying, by a movement of the hand, that she wished me to relinquish,
for an instant, the castor I had clutched.

"Mademoiselle, I am at your service."

"Monsieur, it is of course an excellent plan to encourage effort in
young people by making conspicuous the progress of any particularly
industrious pupil; but do you not think that in the present instance,
Mdlle. Henri can hardly be considered as a concurrent with the other
pupils? She is older than most of them, and has had advantages of an
exclusive nature for acquiring a knowledge of English; on the other
hand, her sphere of life is somewhat beneath theirs; under these
circumstances, a public distinction, conferred upon Mdlle. Henri, may be
the means of suggesting comparisons, and exciting feelings such as would
be far from advantageous to the individual forming their object. The
interest I take in Mdlle. Henri's real welfare makes me desirous of
screening her from annoyances of this sort; besides, monsieur, as I
have before hinted to you, the sentiment of AMOUR-PROPRE has a somewhat
marked preponderance in her character; celebrity has a tendency to
foster this sentiment, and in her it should be rather repressed--she
rather needs keeping down than bringing forward; and then I think,
monsieur--it appears to me that ambition, LITERARY ambition especially,
is not a feeling to be cherished in the mind of a woman: would not
Mdlle. Henri be much safer and happier if taught to believe that in the
quiet discharge of social duties consists her real vocation, than if
stimulated to aspire after applause and publicity? She may never marry;
scanty as are her resources, obscure as are her connections, uncertain
as is her health (for I think her consumptive, her mother died of that
complaint), it is more than probable she never will. I do not see how
she can rise to a position, whence such a step would be possible; but
even in celibacy it would be better for her to retain the character and
habits of a respectable decorous female."

"Indisputably, mademoiselle," was my answer. "Your opinion admits of no
doubt;" and, fearful of the harangue being renewed, I retreated under
cover of that cordial sentence of assent.

At the date of a fortnight after the little incident noted above, I find
it recorded in my diary that a hiatus occurred in Mdlle. Henri's usually
regular attendance in class. The first day or two I wondered at her
absence, but did not like to ask an explanation of it; I thought indeed
some chance word might be dropped which would afford me the information
I wished to obtain, without my running the risk of exciting silly smiles
and gossiping whispers by demanding it. But when a week passed and
the seat at the desk near the door still remained vacant, and when
no allusion was made to the circumstance by any individual of the
class--when, on the contrary, I found that all observed a marked silence
on the point--I determined, COUTE QUI COUTE, to break the ice of this
silly reserve. I selected Sylvie as my informant, because from her I
knew that I should at least get a sensible answer, unaccompanied by
wriggle, titter, or other flourish of folly.

"Ou donc est Mdlle. Henri?" I said one day as I returned an
exercise-book I had been examining.

"Elle est partie, monsieur."

"Partie? et pour combien de temps? Quand reviendra-t-elle?"

"Elle est partie pour toujours, monsieur; elle ne reviendra plus."

"Ah!" was my involuntary exclamation; then after a pause:--

"En etes-vous bien sure, Sylvie?"

"Oui, oui, monsieur, mademoiselle la directrice nous l'a dit elle-meme
il y a deux ou trois jours."

And I could pursue my inquiries no further; time, place, and
circumstances forbade my adding another word. I could neither comment on
what had been said, nor demand further particulars. A question as to the
reason of the teacher's departure, as to whether it had been voluntary
or otherwise, was indeed on my lips, but I suppressed it--there were
listeners all round. An hour after, in passing Sylvie in the corridor as
she was putting on her bonnet, I stopped short and asked:--

"Sylvie, do you know Mdlle. Henri's address? I have some books of hers,"
I added carelessly, "and I should wish to send them to her."

"No, monsieur," replied Sylvie; "but perhaps Rosalie, the portress, will
be able to give it you."

Rosalie's cabinet was just at hand; I stepped in and repeated the
inquiry. Rosalie--a smart French grisette--looked up from her work with
a knowing smile, precisely the sort of smile I had been so desirous to
avoid exciting. Her answer was prepared; she knew nothing whatever
of Mdlle. Henri's address--had never known it. Turning from her with
impatience--for I believed she lied and was hired to lie--I almost
knocked down some one who had been standing at my back; it was the
directress. My abrupt movement made her recoil two or three steps. I was
obliged to apologize, which I did more concisely than politely. No man
likes to be dogged, and in the very irritable mood in which I then
was the sight of Mdlle. Reuter thoroughly incensed me. At the moment I
turned her countenance looked hard, dark, and inquisitive; her eyes
were bent upon me with an expression of almost hungry curiosity. I had
scarcely caught this phase of physiognomy ere it had vanished; a
bland smile played on her features; my harsh apology was received with
good-humoured facility.

"Oh, don't mention it, monsieur; you only touched my hair with your
elbow; it is no worse, only a little dishevelled." She shook it back,
and passing her fingers through her curls, loosened them into more
numerous and flowing ringlets. Then she went on with vivacity:

"Rosalie, I was coming to tell you to go instantly and close the windows
of the salon; the wind is rising, and the muslin curtains will be
covered with dust."

Rosalie departed. "Now," thought I, "this will not do; Mdlle. Reuter
thinks her meanness in eaves-dropping is screened by her art in devising
a pretext, whereas the muslin curtains she speaks of are not more
transparent than this same pretext." An impulse came over me to thrust
the flimsy screen aside, and confront her craft boldly with a word or
two of plain truth. "The rough-shod foot treads most firmly on slippery
ground," thought I; so I began:

"Mademoiselle Henri has left your establishment--been dismissed, I
presume?"

"Ah, I wished to have a little conversation with you, monsieur," replied
the directress with the most natural and affable air in the world;
"but we cannot talk quietly here; will Monsieur step into the garden a
minute?" And she preceded me, stepping out through the glass-door I have
before mentioned.

"There," said she, when we had reached the centre of the middle alley,
and when the foliage of shrubs and trees, now in their summer pride,
closing behind end around us, shut out the view of the house, and thus
imparted a sense of seclusion even to this little plot of ground in the
very core of a capital.

"There, one feels quiet and free when there are only pear-trees and
rose-bushes about one; I dare say you, like me, monsieur, are sometimes
tired of being eternally in the midst of life; of having human faces
always round you, human eyes always upon you, human voices always in
your ear. I am sure I often wish intensely for liberty to spend a whole
month in the country at some little farm-house, bien gentille, bien
propre, tout entouree de champs et de bois; quelle vie charmante que la
vie champetre! N'est-ce pas, monsieur?"

"Cela depend, mademoiselle."

"Que le vent est bon et frais!" continued the directress; and she was
right there, for it was a south wind, soft and sweet. I carried my hat
in my hand, and this gentle breeze, passing through my hair, soothed my
temples like balm. Its refreshing effect, however, penetrated no deeper
than the mere surface of the frame; for as I walked by the side of
Mdlle. Reuter, my heart was still hot within me, and while I was musing
the fire burned; then spake I with my tongue:--

"I understand Mdlle. Henri is gone from hence, and will not return?"

"Ah, true! I meant to have named the subject to you some days ago, but
my time is so completely taken up, I cannot do half the things I wish:
have you never experienced what it is, monsieur, to find the day too
short by twelve hours for your numerous duties?"

"Not often. Mdlle. Henri's departure was not voluntary, I presume? If it
had been, she would certainly have given me some intimation of it, being
my pupil."

"Oh, did she not tell you? that was strange; for my part, I never
thought of adverting to the subject; when one has so many things to
attend to, one is apt to forget little incidents that are not of primary
importance."

"You consider Mdlle. Henri's dismission, then, as a very insignificant
event?"

"Dismission? Ah! she was not dismissed; I can say with truth, monsieur,
that since I became the head of this establishment no master or teacher
has ever been dismissed from it."

"Yet some have left it, mademoiselle?"

"Many; I have found it necessary to change frequently--a change of
instructors is often beneficial to the interests of a school; it gives
life and variety to the proceedings; it amuses the pupils, and suggests
to the parents the idea of exertion and progress."

"Yet when you are tired of a professor or maitresse, you scruple to
dismiss them?"

"No need to have recourse to such extreme measures, I assure you.
Allons, monsieur le professeur--asseyons-nous; je vais vous donner une
petite lecon dans votre etat d'instituteur." (I wish I might write
all she said to me in French--it loses sadly by being translated into
English.) We had now reached THE garden-chair; the directress sat down,
and signed to me to sit by her, but I only rested my knee on the seat,
and stood leaning my head and arm against the embowering branch of a
huge laburnum, whose golden flowers, blent with the dusky green leaves
of a lilac-bush, formed a mixed arch of shade and sunshine over the
retreat. Mdlle. Reuter sat silent a moment; some novel movements were
evidently working in her mind, and they showed their nature on her
astute brow; she was meditating some CHEF D'OEUVRE of policy. Convinced
by several months' experience that the affectation of virtues she did
not possess was unavailing to ensnare me--aware that I had read her real
nature, and would believe nothing of the character she gave out as being
hers--she had determined, at last, to try a new key, and see if the lock
of my heart would yield to that; a little audacity, a word of truth, a
glimpse of the real. "Yes, I will try," was her inward resolve; and then
her blue eye glittered upon me--it did not flash--nothing of flame ever
kindled in its temperate gleam.

"Monsieur fears to sit by me?" she inquired playfully.

"I have no wish to usurp Pelet's place," I answered, for I had got the
habit of speaking to her bluntly--a habit begun in anger, but continued
because I saw that, instead of offending, it fascinated her. She cast
down her eyes, and drooped her eyelids; she sighed uneasily; she turned
with an anxious gesture, as if she would give me the idea of a bird that
flutters in its cage, and would fain fly from its jail and jailer, and
seek its natural mate and pleasant nest.

"Well--and your lesson?" I demanded briefly.

"Ah!" she exclaimed, recovering herself, "you are so young, so frank
and fearless, so talented, so impatient of imbecility, so disdainful of
vulgarity, you need a lesson; here it is then: far more is to be done
in this world by dexterity than by strength; but, perhaps, you knew
that before, for there is delicacy as well as power in your
character--policy, as well as pride?"

"Go on," said I; and I could hardly help smiling, the flattery was so
piquant, so finely seasoned. She caught the prohibited smile, though I
passed my hand over my month to conceal it; and again she made room for
me to sit beside her. I shook my head, though temptation penetrated to
my senses at the moment, and once more I told her to go on.

"Well, then, if ever you are at the head of a large establishment,
dismiss nobody. To speak truth, monsieur (and to you I will speak
truth), I despise people who are always making rows, blustering, sending
off one to the right, and another to the left, urging and hurrying
circumstances. I'll tell you what I like best to do, monsieur, shall I?"
She looked up again; she had compounded her glance well this time--much
archness, more deference, a spicy dash of coquetry, an unveiled
consciousness of capacity. I nodded; she treated me like the great
Mogul; so I became the great Mogul as far as she was concerned.

"I like, monsieur, to take my knitting in my hands, and to sit quietly
down in my chair; circumstances defile past me; I watch their march; so
long as they follow the course I wish, I say nothing, and do nothing; I
don't clap my hands, and cry out 'Bravo! How lucky I am!' to attract
the attention and envy of my neighbours--I am merely passive; but when
events fall out ill--when circumstances become adverse--I watch very
vigilantly; I knit on still, and still I hold my tongue; but every now
and then, monsieur, I just put my toe out--so--and give the rebellious
circumstance a little secret push, without noise, which sends it the way
I wish, and I am successful after all, and nobody has seen my expedient.
So, when teachers or masters become troublesome and inefficient--when,
in short, the interests of the school would suffer from their retaining
their places--I mind my knitting, events progress, circumstances glide
past; I see one which, if pushed ever so little awry, will render
untenable the post I wish to have vacated--the deed is done--the
stumbling-block removed--and no one saw me: I have not made an enemy, I
am rid of an incumbrance."

A moment since, and I thought her alluring; this speech concluded, I
looked on her with distaste. "Just like you," was my cold answer.
"And in this way you have ousted Mdlle. Henri? You wanted her office,
therefore you rendered it intolerable to her?"

"Not at all, monsieur, I was merely anxious about Mdlle. Henri's health;
no, your moral sight is clear and piercing, but there you have failed
to discover the truth. I took--I have always taken a real interest in
Mdlle. Henri's welfare; I did not like her going out in all weathers;
I thought it would be more advantageous for her to obtain a permanent
situation; besides, I considered her now qualified to do something more
than teach sewing. I reasoned with her; left the decision to herself;
she saw the correctness of my views, and adopted them."

"Excellent! and now, mademoiselle, you will have the goodness to give me
her address."

"Her address!" and a sombre and stony change came over the mien of
the directress. "Her address? Ah?--well--I wish I could oblige you,
monsieur, but I cannot, and I will tell you why; whenever I myself asked
her for her address, she always evaded the inquiry. I thought--I may
be wrong--but I THOUGHT her motive for doing so, was a natural, though
mistaken reluctance to introduce me to some, probably, very poor
abode; her means were narrow, her origin obscure; she lives somewhere,
doubtless, in the 'basse ville.'"

"I'll not lose sight of my best pupil yet," said I, "though she were
born of beggars and lodged in a cellar; for the rest, it is absurd to
make a bugbear of her origin to me--I happen to know that she was a
Swiss pastor's daughter, neither more nor less; and, as to her narrow
means, I care nothing for the poverty of her purse so long as her heart
overflows with affluence."

"Your sentiments are perfectly noble, monsieur," said the directress,
affecting to suppress a yawn; her sprightliness was now extinct, her
temporary candour shut up; the little, red-coloured, piratical-looking
pennon of audacity she had allowed to float a minute in the air, was
furled, and the broad, sober-hued flag of dissimulation again hung
low over the citadel. I did not like her thus, so I cut short the
TETE-A-TETE and departed.






CHAPTER XIX.

NOVELISTS should never allow themselves to weary of the study of real
life. If they observed this duty conscientiously, they would give us
fewer pictures chequered with vivid contrasts of light and shade;
they would seldom elevate their heroes and heroines to the heights of
rapture--still seldomer sink them to the depths of despair; for if we
rarely taste the fulness of joy in this life, we yet more rarely savour
the acrid bitterness of hopeless anguish; unless, indeed, we have
plunged like beasts into sensual indulgence, abused, strained,
stimulated, again overstrained, and, at last, destroyed our faculties
for enjoyment; then, truly, we may find ourselves without support,
robbed of hope. Our agony is great, and how can it end? We have broken
the spring of our powers; life must be all suffering--too feeble to
conceive faith--death must be darkness--God, spirits, religion can have
no place in our collapsed minds, where linger only hideous and polluting
recollections of vice; and time brings us on to the brink of the grave,
and dissolution flings us in--a rag eaten through and through with
disease, wrung together with pain, stamped into the churchyard sod by
the inexorable heel of despair.

But the man of regular life and rational mind never despairs. He loses
his property--it is a blow--he staggers a moment; then, his energies,
roused by the smart, are at work to seek a remedy; activity soon
mitigates regret. Sickness affects him; he takes patience--endures what
he cannot cure. Acute pain racks him; his writhing limbs know not where
to find rest; he leans on Hope's anchors. Death takes from him what
he loves; roots up, and tears violently away the stem round which his
affections were twined--a dark, dismal time, a frightful wrench--but
some morning Religion looks into his desolate house with sunrise, and
says, that in another world, another life, he shall meet his kindred
again. She speaks of that world as a place unsullied by sin--of that
life, as an era unembittered by suffering; she mightily strengthens
her consolation by connecting with it two ideas--which mortals cannot
comprehend, but on which they love to repose--Eternity, Immortality; and
the mind of the mourner, being filled with an image, faint yet glorious,
of heavenly hills all light and peace--of a spirit resting there in
bliss--of a day when his spirit shall also alight there, free and
disembodied--of a reunion perfected by love, purified from fear--he
takes courage--goes out to encounter the necessities and discharge the
duties of life; and, though sadness may never lift her burden from his
mind, Hope will enable him to support it.

Well--and what suggested all this? and what is the inference to be drawn
therefrom? What suggested it, is the circumstance of my best pupil--my
treasure--being snatched from my hands, and put away out of my reach;
the inference to be drawn from it is--that, being a steady, reasonable
man, I did not allow the resentment, disappointment, and grief,
engendered in my mind by this evil chance, to grow there to any
monstrous size; nor did I allow them to monopolize the whole space of my
heart; I pent them, on the contrary, in one strait and secret nook. In
the daytime, too, when I was about my duties, I put them on the silent
system; and it was only after I had closed the door of my chamber
at night that I somewhat relaxed my severity towards these morose
nurslings, and allowed vent to their language of murmurs; then, in
revenge, they sat on my pillow, haunted my bed, and kept me awake with
their long, midnight cry.

A week passed. I had said nothing more to Mdlle. Reuter. I had been calm
in my demeanour to her, though stony cold and hard. When I looked at
her, it was with the glance fitting to be bestowed on one who I knew
had consulted jealousy as an adviser, and employed treachery as an
instrument--the glance of quiet disdain and rooted distrust. On Saturday
evening, ere I left the house, I stept into the SALLE-A-MANGER, where
she was sitting alone, and, placing myself before her, I asked, with
the same tranquil tone and manner that I should have used had I put the
question for the first time--

"Mademoiselle, will you have the goodness to give me the address of
Frances Evans Henri?"

A little surprised, but not disconcerted, she smilingly disclaimed any
knowledge of that address, adding, "Monsieur has perhaps forgotten that
I explained all about that circumstance before--a week ago?"

"Mademoiselle," I continued, "you would greatly oblige me by directing
me to that young person's abode."

She seemed somewhat puzzled; and, at last, looking up with an admirably
counterfeited air of naivete, she demanded, "Does Monsieur think I am
telling an untruth?"

Still avoiding to give her a direct answer, I said, "It is not then your
intention, mademoiselle, to oblige me in this particular?"

"But, monsieur, how can I tell you what I do not know?"

"Very well; I understand you perfectly, mademoiselle, and now I have
only two or three words to say. This is the last week in July; in
another month the vacation will commence, have the goodness to avail
yourself of the leisure it will afford you to look out for another
English master--at the close of August, I shall be under the necessity
of resigning my post in your establishment."

I did not wait for her comments on this announcement, but bowed and
immediately withdrew.

That same evening, soon after dinner, a servant brought me a small
packet; it was directed in a hand I knew, but had not hoped so soon to
see again; being in my own apartment and alone, there was nothing to
prevent my immediately opening it; it contained four five-franc pieces,
and a note in English.

"MONSIEUR,

"I came to Mdlle. Reuter's house yesterday, at the time when I knew you
would be just about finishing your lesson, and I asked if I might go
into the schoolroom and speak to you. Mdlle. Reuter came out and said
you were already gone; it had not yet struck four, so I thought she must
be mistaken, but concluded it would be vain to call another day on the
same errand. In one sense a note will do as well--it will wrap up the
20 francs, the price of the lessons I have received from you; and if it
will not fully express the thanks I owe you in addition--if it will not
bid you good-bye as I could wish to have done--if it will not tell you,
as I long to do, how sorry I am that I shall probably never see you
more--why, spoken words would hardly be more adequate to the task. Had
I seen you, I should probably have stammered out something feeble and
unsatisfactory--something belying my feelings rather than explaining
them; so it is perhaps as well that I was denied admission to your
presence. You often remarked, monsieur, that my devoirs dwelt a great
deal on fortitude in bearing grief--you said I introduced that theme too
often: I find indeed that it is much easier to write about a severe duty
than to perform it, for I am oppressed when I see and feel to what a
reverse fate has condemned me; you were kind to me, monsieur--very kind;
I am afflicted--I am heart-broken to be quite separated from you; soon
I shall have no friend on earth. But it is useless troubling you with my
distresses. What claim have I on your sympathy? None; I will then say no
more.

"Farewell, Monsieur.

"F. E. HENRI."

I put up the note in my pocket-book. I slipped the five-franc pieces
into my purse--then I took a turn through my narrow chamber.

"Mdlle. Reuter talked about her poverty," said I, "and she is poor;
yet she pays her debts and more. I have not yet given her a quarter's
lessons, and she has sent me a quarter's due. I wonder of what she
deprived herself to scrape together the twenty francs--I wonder what
sort of a place she has to live in, and what sort of a woman her aunt
is, and whether she is likely to get employment to supply the place she
has lost. No doubt she will have to trudge about long enough from school
to school, to inquire here, and apply there--be rejected in this place,
disappointed in that. Many an evening she'll go to her bed tired
and unsuccessful. And the directress would not let her in to bid me
good-bye? I might not have the chance of standing with her for a few
minutes at a window in the schoolroom and exchanging some half-dozen of
sentences--getting to know where she lived--putting matters in train
for having all things arranged to my mind? No address on the note"--I
continued, drawing it again from the pocket-book and examining it on
each side of the two leaves: "women are women, that is certain, and
always do business like women; men mechanically put a date and address
to their communications. And these five-franc pieces?"--(I hauled them
forth from my purse)--"if she had offered me them herself instead of
tying them up with a thread of green silk in a kind of Lilliputian
packet, I could have thrust them back into her little hand, and shut
up the small, taper fingers over them--so--and compelled her shame, her
pride, her shyness, all to yield to a little bit of determined Will--now
where is she? How can I get at her?"

Opening my chamber door I walked down into the kitchen.

"Who brought the packet?" I asked of the servant who had delivered it to
me.

"Un petit commissionaire, monsieur."

"Did he say anything?"

"Rien."

And I wended my way up the back-stairs, wondrously the wiser for my
inquiries.

"No matter," said I to myself, as I again closed the door. "No
matter--I'll seek her through Brussels."

And I did. I sought her day by day whenever I had a moment's leisure,
for four weeks; I sought her on Sundays all day long; I sought her on
the Boulevards, in the Allee Verte, in the Park; I sought her in Ste.
Gudule and St. Jacques; I sought her in the two Protestant chapels; I
attended these latter at the German, French, and English services, not
doubting that I should meet her at one of them. All my researches were
absolutely fruitless; my security on the last point was proved by the
event to be equally groundless with my other calculations. I stood
at the door of each chapel after the service, and waited till every
individual had come out, scrutinizing every gown draping a slender form,
peering under every bonnet covering a young head. In vain; I saw
girlish figures pass me, drawing their black scarfs over their sloping
shoulders, but none of them had the exact turn and air of Mdlle.
Henri's; I saw pale and thoughtful faces "encadrees" in bands of brown
hair, but I never found her forehead, her eyes, her eyebrows. All the
features of all the faces I met seemed frittered away, because my eye
failed to recognize the peculiarities it was bent upon; an ample space
of brow and a large, dark, and serious eye, with a fine but decided line
of eyebrow traced above.

"She has probably left Brussels--perhaps is gone to England, as she
said she would," muttered I inwardly, as on the afternoon of the fourth
Sunday, I turned from the door of the chapel-royal which the door-keeper
had just closed and locked, and followed in the wake of the last of the
congregation, now dispersed and dispersing over the square. I had
soon outwalked the couples of English gentlemen and ladies. (Gracious
goodness! why don't they dress better? My eye is yet filled with visions
of the high-flounced, slovenly, and tumbled dresses in costly silk and
satin, of the large unbecoming collars in expensive lace; of the ill-cut
coats and strangely fashioned pantaloons which every Sunday, at the
English service, filled the choirs of the chapel-royal, and after it,
issuing forth into the square, came into disadvantageous contrast with
freshly and trimly attired foreign figures, hastening to attend salut
at the church of Coburg.) I had passed these pairs of Britons, and
the groups of pretty British children, and the British footmen and
waiting-maids; I had crossed the Place Royale, and got into the Rue
Royale, thence I had diverged into the Rue de Louvain--an old and quiet
street. I remember that, feeling a little hungry, and not desiring to
go back and take my share of the "gouter," now on the refectory-table
at Pelet's--to wit, pistolets and water--I stepped into a baker's and
refreshed myself on a COUC(?)--it is a Flemish word, I don't know how
to spell it--A CORINTHE-ANGLICE, a currant bun--and a cup of coffee; and
then I strolled on towards the Porte de Louvain. Very soon I was out of
the city, and slowly mounting the hill, which ascends from the gate, I
took my time; for the afternoon, though cloudy, was very sultry, and not
a breeze stirred to refresh the atmosphere. No inhabitant of Brussels
need wander far to search for solitude; let him but move half a league
from his own city and he will find her brooding still and blank over
the wide fields, so drear though so fertile, spread out treeless and
trackless round the capital of Brabant. Having gained the summit of the
hill, and having stood and looked long over the cultured but lifeless
campaign, I felt a wish to quit the high road, which I had hitherto
followed, and get in among those tilled grounds--fertile as the beds
of a Brobdignagian kitchen-garden--spreading far and wide even to the
boundaries of the horizon, where, from a dusk green, distance changed
them to a sullen blue, and confused their tints with those of the livid
and thunderous-looking sky. Accordingly I turned up a by-path to the
right; I had not followed it far ere it brought me, as I expected, into
the fields, amidst which, just before me, stretched a long and lofty
white wall enclosing, as it seemed from the foliage showing above, some
thickly planted nursery of yew and cypress, for of that species were
the branches resting on the pale parapets, and crowding gloomily about a
massive cross, planted doubtless on a central eminence and extending its
arms, which seemed of black marble, over the summits of those sinister
trees. I approached, wondering to what house this well-protected garden
appertained; I turned the angle of the wall, thinking to see some
stately residence; I was close upon great iron gates; there was a
hut serving for a lodge near, but I had no occasion to apply for the
key--the gates were open; I pushed one leaf back--rain had rusted
its hinges, for it groaned dolefully as they revolved. Thick planting
embowered the entrance. Passing up the avenue, I saw objects on
each hand which, in their own mute language of inscription and sign,
explained clearly to what abode I had made my way. This was the
house appointed for all living; crosses, monuments, and garlands of
everlastings announced, "The Protestant Cemetery, outside the gate of
Louvain."

The place was large enough to afford half an hour's strolling without
the monotony of treading continually the same path; and, for those who
love to peruse the annals of graveyards, here was variety of inscription
enough to occupy the attention for double or treble that space of time.
Hither people of many kindreds, tongues, and nations, had brought their
dead for interment; and here, on pages of stone, of marble, and of
brass, were written names, dates, last tributes of pomp or love, in
English, in French, in German, and Latin. Here the Englishman had
erected a marble monument over the remains of his Mary Smith or Jane
Brown, and inscribed it only with her name. There the French widower had
shaded the grave of his Elmire or Celestine with a brilliant thicket
of roses, amidst which a little tablet rising, bore an equally bright
testimony to her countless virtues. Every nation, tribe, and kindred,
mourned after its own fashion; and how soundless was the mourning of
all! My own tread, though slow and upon smooth-rolled paths, seemed to
startle, because it formed the sole break to a silence otherwise total.
Not only the winds, but the very fitful, wandering airs, were that
afternoon, as by common consent, all fallen asleep in their various
quarters; the north was hushed, the south silent, the east sobbed not,
nor did the west whisper. The clouds in heaven were condensed and
dull, but apparently quite motionless. Under the trees of this cemetery
nestled a warm breathless gloom, out of which the cypresses stood up
straight and mute, above which the willows hung low and still; where
the flowers, as languid as fair, waited listless for night dew or
thunder-shower; where the tombs, and those they hid, lay impassible to
sun or shadow, to rain or drought.

Importuned by the sound of my own footsteps, I turned off upon the turf,
and slowly advanced to a grove of yews; I saw something stir among the
stems; I thought it might be a broken branch swinging, my short-sighted
vision had caught no form, only a sense of motion; but the dusky shade
passed on, appearing and disappearing at the openings in the avenue. I
soon discerned it was a living thing, and a human thing; and, drawing
nearer, I perceived it was a woman, pacing slowly to and fro, and
evidently deeming herself alone as I had deemed myself alone, and
meditating as I had been meditating. Ere long she returned to a seat
which I fancy she had but just quitted, or I should have caught sight
of her before. It was in a nook, screened by a clump of trees; there was
the white wall before her, and a little stone set up against the wall,
and, at the foot of the stone, was an allotment of turf freshly turned
up, a new-made grave. I put on my spectacles, and passed softly close
behind her; glancing at the inscription on the stone, I read, "Julienne
Henri, died at Brussels, aged sixty. August 10th, 18--." Having perused
the inscription, I looked down at the form sitting bent and thoughtful
just under my eyes, unconscious of the vicinity of any living thing; it
was a slim, youthful figure in mourning apparel of the plainest black
stuff, with a little simple, black crape bonnet; I felt, as well as
saw, who it was; and, moving neither hand nor foot, I stood some moments
enjoying the security of conviction. I had sought her for a month, and
had never discovered one of her traces--never met a hope, or seized
a chance of encountering her anywhere. I had been forced to loosen my
grasp on expectation; and, but an hour ago, had sunk slackly under
the discouraging thought that the current of life, and the impulse
of destiny, had swept her for ever from my reach; and, behold, while
bending suddenly earthward beneath the pressure of despondency--while
following with my eyes the track of sorrow on the turf of a
graveyard--here was my lost jewel dropped on the tear-fed herbage,
nestling in the messy and mouldy roots of yew-trees.

Frances sat very quiet, her elbow on her knee, and her head on her hand.
I knew she could retain a thinking attitude a long time without change;
at last, a tear fell; she had been looking at the name on the
stone before her, and her heart had no doubt endured one of those
constrictions with which the desolate living, regretting the dead, are,
at times, so sorely oppressed. Many tears rolled down, which she wiped
away, again and again, with her handkerchief; some distressed sobs
escaped her, and then, the paroxysm over, she sat quiet as before. I put
my hand gently on her shoulder; no need further to prepare her, for
she was neither hysterical nor liable to fainting-fits; a sudden push,
indeed, might have startled her, but the contact of my quiet touch
merely woke attention as I wished; and, though she turned quickly, yet
so lightning-swift is thought--in some minds especially--I believe the
wonder of what--the consciousness of who it was that thus stole unawares
on her solitude, had passed through her brain, and flashed into her
heart, even before she had effected that hasty movement; at least,
Amazement had hardly opened her eyes and raised them to mine, ere
Recognition informed their irids with most speaking brightness. Nervous
surprise had hardly discomposed her features ere a sentiment of most
vivid joy shone clear and warm on her whole countenance. I had hardly
time to observe that she was wasted and pale, ere called to feel a
responsive inward pleasure by the sense of most full and exquisite
pleasure glowing in the animated flush, and shining in the expansive
light, now diffused over my pupil's face. It was the summer sun flashing
out after the heavy summer shower; and what fertilizes more rapidly than
that beam, burning almost like fire in its ardour?

I hate boldness--that boldness which is of the brassy brow and insensate
nerves; but I love the courage of the strong heart, the fervour of the
generous blood; I loved with passion the light of Frances Evans' clear
hazel eye when it did not fear to look straight into mine; I loved the
tones with which she uttered the words--

"Mon maitre! mon maitre!"

I loved the movement with which she confided her hand to my hand; I
loved her as she stood there, penniless and parentless; for a sensualist
charmless, for me a treasure--my best object of sympathy on earth,
thinking such thoughts as I thought, feeling such feelings as I felt; my
ideal of the shrine in which to seal my stores of love; personification
of discretion and forethought, of diligence and perseverance, of
self-denial and self-control--those guardians, those trusty keepers of
the gift I longed to confer on her--the gift of all my affections;
model of truth and honour, of independence and conscientiousness--those
refiners and sustainers of an honest life; silent possessor of a well
of tenderness, of a flame, as genial as still, as pure as quenchless,
of natural feeling, natural passion--those sources of refreshment and
comfort to the sanctuary of home. I knew how quietly and how deeply the
well bubbled in her heart; I knew how the more dangerous flame burned
safely under the eye of reason; I had seen when the fire shot up a
moment high and vivid, when the accelerated heat troubled life's current
in its channels; I had seen reason reduce the rebel, and humble its
blaze to embers. I had confidence in Frances Evans; I had respect
for her, and as I drew her arm through mine, and led her out of the
cemetery, I felt I had another sentiment, as strong as confidence, as
firm as respect, more fervid than either--that of love.

"Well, my pupil," said I, as the ominous sounding gate swung to behind
us--"Well, I have found you again: a month's search has seemed long,
and I little thought to have discovered my lost sheep straying amongst
graves."

Never had I addressed her but as "Mademoiselle" before, and to speak
thus was to take up a tone new to both her and me. Her answer suprised
me that this language ruffled none of her feelings, woke no discord in
her heart:

"Mon maitre," she said, "have you troubled yourself to seek me? I little
imagined you would think much of my absence, but I grieved bitterly to
be taken away from you. I was sorry for that circumstance when heavier
troubles ought to have made me forget it."

"Your aunt is dead?"

"Yes, a fortnight since, and she died full of regret, which I could not
chase from her mind; she kept repeating, even during the last night
of her existence, 'Frances, you will be so lonely when I am gone,
so friendless:' she wished too that she could have been buried in
Switzerland, and it was I who persuaded her in her old age to leave the
banks of Lake Leman, and to come, only as it seems to die, in this flat
region of Flanders. Willingly would I have observed her last wish, and
taken her remains back to our own country, but that was impossible; I
was forced to lay her here."

"She was ill but a short time, I presume?"

"But three weeks. When she began to sink I asked Mdlle. Reuter's leave
to stay with her and wait on her; I readily got leave."

"Do you return to the pensionnat!" I demanded hastily.

"Monsieur, when I had been at home a week Mdlle. Reuter called one
evening, just after I had got my aunt to bed; she went into her room
to speak to her, and was extremely civil and affable, as she always is;
afterwards she came and sat with me a long time, and just as she rose to
go away, she said: "Mademoiselle, I shall not soon cease to regret your
departure from my establishment, though indeed it is true that you have
taught your class of pupils so well that they are all quite accomplished
in the little works you manage so skilfully, and have not the slightest
need of further instruction; my second teacher must in future supply
your place, with regard to the younger pupils, as well as she can,
though she is indeed an inferior artiste to you, and doubtless it will
be your part now to assume a higher position in your calling; I am sure
you will everywhere find schools and families willing to profit by your
talents.' And then she paid me my last quarter's salary. I asked, as
mademoiselle would no doubt think, very bluntly, if she designed to
discharge me from the establishment. She smiled at my inelegance of
speech, and answered that 'our connection as employer and employed was
certainly dissolved, but that she hoped still to retain the pleasure of
my acquaintance; she should always be happy to see me as a friend;' and
then she said something about the excellent condition of the streets,
and the long continuance of fine weather, and went away quite cheerful."

I laughed inwardly; all this was so like the directress--so like what I
had expected and guessed of her conduct; and then the exposure and proof
of her lie, unconsciously afforded by Frances:--"She had frequently
applied for Mdlle. Henri's address," forsooth; "Mdlle. Henri had always
evaded giving it," &c., &c., and here I found her a visitor at the very
house of whose locality she had professed absolute ignorance!

Any comments I might have intended to make on my pupil's communication,
were checked by the plashing of large rain-drops on our faces and on the
path, and by the muttering of a distant but coming storm. The warning
obvious in stagnant air and leaden sky had already induced me to take
the road leading back to Brussels, and now I hastened my own steps and
those of my companion, and, as our way lay downhill, we got on rapidly.
There was an interval after the fall of the first broad drops before
heavy rain came on; in the meantime we had passed through the Porte de
Louvain, and were again in the city.

"Where do you live?" I asked; "I will see you safe home."

"Rue Notre Dame aux Neiges," answered Frances.

It was not far from the Rue de Louvain, and we stood on the doorsteps
of the house we sought ere the clouds, severing with loud peal and
shattered cataract of lightning, emptied their livid folds in a torrent,
heavy, prone, and broad.

"Come in! come in!" said Frances, as, after putting her into the house,
I paused ere I followed: the word decided me; I stepped across the
threshold, shut the door on the rushing, flashing, whitening storm, and
followed her upstairs to her apartments. Neither she nor I were wet; a
projection over the door had warded off the straight-descending flood;
none but the first, large drops had touched our garments; one minute
more and we should not have had a dry thread on us.

Stepping over a little mat of green wool, I found myself in a small room
with a painted floor and a square of green carpet in the middle; the
articles of furniture were few, but all bright and exquisitely clean;
order reigned through its narrow limits--such order as it soothed my
punctilious soul to behold. And I had hesitated to enter the abode,
because I apprehended after all that Mdlle. Reuter's hint about its
extreme poverty might be too well-founded, and I feared to embarrass the
lace-mender by entering her lodgings unawares! Poor the place might be;
poor truly it was; but its neatness was better than elegance, and had
but a bright little fire shone on that clean hearth, I should have
deemed it more attractive than a palace. No fire was there, however, and
no fuel laid ready to light; the lace-mender was unable to allow herself
that indulgence, especially now when, deprived by death of her sole
relative, she had only her own unaided exertions to rely on. Frances
went into an inner room to take off her bonnet, and she came out a
model of frugal neatness, with her well-fitting black stuff dress, so
accurately defining her elegant bust and taper waist, with her spotless
white collar turned back from a fair and shapely neck, with her
plenteous brown hair arranged in smooth bands on her temples, and in
a large Grecian plait behind: ornaments she had none--neither brooch,
ring, nor ribbon; she did well enough without them--perfection of fit,
proportion of form, grace of carriage, agreeably supplied their place.
Her eye, as she re-entered the small sitting-room, instantly sought
mine, which was just then lingering on the hearth; I knew she read at
once the sort of inward ruth and pitying pain which the chill vacancy of
that hearth stirred in my soul: quick to penetrate, quick to determine,
and quicker to put in practice, she had in a moment tied a holland apron
round her waist; then she disappeared, and reappeared with a basket;
it had a cover; she opened it, and produced wood and coal; deftly and
compactly she arranged them in the grate.

"It is her whole stock, and she will exhaust it out of hospitality,"
thought I.

"What are you going to do?" I asked: "not surely to light a fire this
hot evening? I shall be smothered."

"Indeed, monsieur, I feel it very chilly since the rain began; besides,
I must boil the water for my tea, for I take tea on Sundays; you will be
obliged to try and bear the heat."

She had struck a light; the wood was already in a blaze; and truly, when
contrasted with the darkness, the wild tumult of the tempest without,
that peaceful glow which began to beam on the now animated hearth,
seemed very cheering. A low, purring sound, from some quarter, announced
that another being, besides myself, was pleased with the change; a
black cat, roused by the light from its sleep on a little cushioned
foot-stool, came and rubbed its head against Frances' gown as she knelt;
she caressed it, saying it had been a favourite with her "pauvre tante
Julienne."

The fire being lit, the hearth swept, and a small kettle of a very
antique pattern, such as I thought I remembered to have seen in old
farmhouses in England, placed over the now ruddy flame, Frances' hands
were washed, and her apron removed in an instant; then she opened a
cupboard, and took out a tea-tray, on which she had soon arranged a
china tea-equipage, whose pattern, shape, and size, denoted a remote
antiquity; a little, old-fashioned silver spoon was deposited in each
saucer; and a pair of silver tongs, equally old-fashioned, were laid
on the sugar-basin; from the cupboard, too, was produced a tidy
silver cream-ewer, not larger then an egg-shell. While making these
preparations, she chanced to look up, and, reading curiosity in my eyes,
she smiled and asked--

"Is this like England, monsieur?"

"Like the England of a hundred years ago," I replied.

"Is it truly? Well, everything on this tray is at least a hundred
years old: these cups, these spoons, this ewer, are all heirlooms; my
great-grandmother left them to my grandmother, she to my mother, and my
mother brought them with her from England to Switzerland, and left them
to me; and, ever since I was a little girl, I have thought I should like
to carry them back to England, whence they came."

She put some pistolets on the table; she made the tea, as foreigners do
make tea--i.e., at the rate of a teaspoonful to half-a-dozen cups;
she placed me a chair, and, as I took it, she asked, with a sort of
exaltation--

"Will it make you think yourself at home for a moment?"

"If I had a home in England, I believe it would recall it," I
answered; and, in truth, there was a sort of illusion in seeing the
fair-complexioned English-looking girl presiding at the English meal,
and speaking in the English language.

"You have then no home?" was her remark.

"None, nor ever have had. If ever I possess a home, it must be of my own
making, and the task is yet to begin." And, as I spoke, a pang, new to
me, shot across my heart: it was a pang of mortification at the humility
of my position, and the inadequacy of my means; while with that pang was
born a strong desire to do more, earn more, be more, possess more;
and in the increased possessions, my roused and eager spirit panted to
include the home I had never had, the wife I inwardly vowed to win.

Frances' tea was little better than hot water, sugar, and milk; and her
pistolets, with which she could not offer me butter, were sweet to my
palate as manna.

The repast over, and the treasured plate and porcelain being washed and
put by, the bright table rubbed still brighter, "le chat de ma tante
Julienne" also being fed with provisions brought forth on a plate for
its special use, a few stray cinders, and a scattering of ashes too,
being swept from the hearth, Frances at last sat down; and then, as she
took a chair opposite to me, she betrayed, for the first time, a little
embarrassment; and no wonder, for indeed I had unconsciously watched
her rather too closely, followed all her steps and all her movements
a little too perseveringly with my eyes, for she mesmerized me by
the grace and alertness of her action--by the deft, cleanly, and even
decorative effect resulting from each touch of her slight and fine
fingers; and when, at last, she subsided to stillness, the intelligence
of her face seemed beauty to me, and I dwelt on it accordingly. Her
colour, however, rising, rather than settling with repose, and her eyes
remaining downcast, though I kept waiting for the lids to be raised that
I might drink a ray of the light I loved--a light where fire dissolved
in softness, where affection tempered penetration, where, just now
at least, pleasure played with thought--this expectation not being
gratified, I began at last to suspect that I had probably myself to
blame for the disappointment; I must cease gazing, and begin talking,
if I wished to break the spell under which she now sat motionless; so
recollecting the composing effect which an authoritative tone and manner
had ever been wont to produce on her, I said--

"Get one of your English books, mademoiselle, for the rain yet falls
heavily, and will probably detain me half an hour longer."

Released, and set at ease, up she rose, got her book, and accepted at
once the chair I placed for her at my side. She had selected "Paradise
Lost" from her shelf of classics, thinking, I suppose, the religious
character of the book best adapted it to Sunday; I told her to begin at
the beginning, and while she read Milton's invocation to that heavenly
muse, who on the "secret top of Oreb or Sinai" had taught the Hebrew
shepherd how in the womb of chaos, the conception of a world had
originated and ripened, I enjoyed, undisturbed, the treble pleasure of
having her near me, hearing the sound of her voice--a sound sweet and
satisfying in my ear--and looking, by intervals, at her face: of this
last privilege, I chiefly availed myself when I found fault with an
intonation, a pause, or an emphasis; as long as I dogmatized, I might
also gaze, without exciting too warm a flush.

