"Enough," said I, when she had gone through some half dozen pages (a
work of time with her, for she read slowly and paused often to ask and
receive information)--"enough; and now the rain is ceasing, and I must
soon go." For indeed, at that moment, looking towards the window, I
saw it all blue; the thunder-clouds were broken and scattered, and the
setting August sun sent a gleam like the reflection of rubies through
the lattice. I got up; I drew on my gloves.

"You have not yet found another situation to supply the place of that
from which you were dismissed by Mdlle. Reuter?"

"No, monsieur; I have made inquiries everywhere, but they all ask me
for references; and to speak truth, I do not like to apply to the
directress, because I consider she acted neither justly nor honourably
towards me; she used underhand means to set my pupils against me, and
thereby render me unhappy while I held my place in her establishment,
and she eventually deprived me of it by a masked and hypocritical
manoeuvre, pretending that she was acting for my good, but really
snatching from me my chief means of subsistence, at a crisis when not
only my own life, but that of another, depended on my exertions: of her
I will never more ask a favour."

"How, then, do you propose to get on? How do you live now?"

"I have still my lace-mending trade; with care it will keep me from
starvation, and I doubt not by dint of exertion to get better employment
yet; it is only a fortnight since I began to try; my courage or hopes
are by no means worn out yet."

"And if you get what you wish, what then? what are your ultimate views?"

"To save enough to cross the Channel: I always look to England as my
Canaan."

"Well, well--ere long I shall pay you another visit; good evening now,"
and I left her rather abruptly; I had much ado to resist a strong inward
impulse, urging me to take a warmer, more expressive leave: what so
natural as to fold her for a moment in a close embrace, to imprint one
kiss on her cheek or forehead? I was not unreasonable--that was all I
wanted; satisfied in that point, I could go away content; and Reason
denied me even this; she ordered me to turn my eyes from her face, and
my steps from her apartment--to quit her as dryly and coldly as I would
have quitted old Madame Pelet. I obeyed, but I swore rancorously to be
avenged one day. "I'll earn a right to do as I please in this matter,
or I'll die in the contest. I have one object before me now--to get that
Genevese girl for my wife; and my wife she shall be--that is, provided
she has as much, or half as much regard for her master as he has
for her. And would she be so docile, so smiling, so happy under my
instructions if she had not? would she sit at my side when I dictate
or correct, with such a still, contented, halcyon mien?" for I had ever
remarked, that however sad or harassed her countenance might be when
I entered a room, yet after I had been near her, spoken to her a few
words, given her some directions, uttered perhaps some reproofs, she
would, all at once, nestle into a nook of happiness, and look up serene
and revived. The reproofs suited her best of all: while I scolded she
would chip away with her pen-knife at a pencil or a pen; fidgetting a
little, pouting a little, defending herself by monosyllables, and when I
deprived her of the pen or pencil, fearing it would be all cut away,
and when I interdicted even the monosyllabic defence, for the purpose
of working up the subdued excitement a little higher, she would at last
raise her eyes and give me a certain glance, sweetened with gaiety, and
pointed with defiance, which, to speak truth, thrilled me as nothing had
ever done, and made me, in a fashion (though happily she did not know
it), her subject, if not her slave. After such little scenes her spirits
would maintain their flow, often for some hours, and, as I remarked
before, her health therefrom took a sustenance and vigour which,
previously to the event of her aunt's death and her dismissal, had
almost recreated her whole frame.

It has taken me several minutes to write these last sentences; but I had
thought all their purport during the brief interval of descending the
stairs from Frances' room. Just as I was opening the outer door,
I remembered the twenty francs which I had not restored; I paused:
impossible to carry them away with me; difficult to force them back
on their original owner; I had now seen her in her own humble abode,
witnessed the dignity of her poverty, the pride of order, the fastidious
care of conservatism, obvious in the arrangement and economy of her
little home; I was sure she would not suffer herself to be excused
paying her debts; I was certain the favour of indemnity would be
accepted from no hand, perhaps least of all from mine: yet these four
five-franc pieces were a burden to my self-respect, and I must get
rid of them. An expedient--a clumsy one no doubt, but the best I
could devise-suggested itself to me. I darted up the stairs, knocked,
re-entered the room as if in haste:--

"Mademoiselle, I have forgotten one of my gloves; I must have left it
here."

She instantly rose to seek it; as she turned her back, I--being now
at the hearth--noiselessly lifted a little vase, one of a set of china
ornaments, as old-fashioned as the tea-cups--slipped the money under it,
then saying--"Oh here is my glove! I had dropped it within the fender;
good evening, mademoiselle," I made my second exit.

Brief as my impromptu return had been, it had afforded me time to pick
up a heart-ache; I remarked that Frances had already removed the red
embers of her cheerful little fire from the grate: forced to calculate
every item, to save in every detail, she had instantly on my departure
retrenched a luxury too expensive to be enjoyed alone.

"I am glad it is not yet winter," thought I; "but in two months more
come the winds and rains of November; would to God that before then I
could earn the right, and the power, to shovel coals into that grate AD
LIBITUM!"

Already the pavement was drying; a balmy and fresh breeze stirred the
air, purified by lightning; I felt the West behind me, where spread a
sky like opal; azure immingled with crimson: the enlarged sun, glorious
in Tyrian tints, dipped his brim already; stepping, as I was, eastward,
I faced a vast bank of clouds, but also I had before me the arch of an
evening rainbow; a perfect rainbow--high, wide, vivid. I looked long;
my eye drank in the scene, and I suppose my brain must have absorbed
it; for that night, after lying awake in pleasant fever a long time,
watching the silent sheet-lightning, which still played among the
retreating clouds, and flashed silvery over the stars, I at last fell
asleep; and then in a dream were reproduced the setting sun, the bank of
clouds, the mighty rainbow. I stood, methought, on a terrace; I leaned
over a parapeted wall; there was space below me, depth I could not
fathom, but hearing an endless dash of waves, I believed it to be the
sea; sea spread to the horizon; sea of changeful green and intense
blue: all was soft in the distance; all vapour-veiled. A spark of gold
glistened on the line between water and air, floated up, approached,
enlarged, changed; the object hung midway between heaven and earth,
under the arch of the rainbow; the soft but dusk clouds diffused behind.
It hovered as on wings; pearly, fleecy, gleaming air streamed like
raiment round it; light, tinted with carnation, coloured what seemed
face and limbs; a large star shone with still lustre on an angel's
forehead; an upraised arm and hand, glancing like a ray, pointed to the
bow overhead, and a voice in my heart whispered--

"Hope smiles on Effort!"






CHAPTER XX.

A COMPETENCY was what I wanted; a competency it was now my aim and
resolve to secure; but never had I been farther from the mark. With
August the school-year (l'annee scolaire) closed, the examinations
concluded, the prizes were adjudged, the schools dispersed, the gates of
all colleges, the doors of all pensionnats shut, not to be reopened till
the beginning or middle of October. The last day of August was at hand,
and what was my position? Had I advanced a step since the commencement
of the past quarter? On the contrary, I had receded one. By renouncing
my engagement as English master in Mdlle. Reuter's establishment, I had
voluntarily cut off 20l. from my yearly income; I had diminished my 60l.
per annum to 40l., and even that sum I now held by a very precarious
tenure.

It is some time since I made any reference to M. Pelet. The moonlight
walk is, I think, the last incident recorded in this narrative where
that gentleman cuts any conspicuous figure: the fact is, since that
event, a change had come over the spirit of our intercourse. He, indeed,
ignorant that the still hour, a cloudless moon, and an open lattice,
had revealed to me the secret of his selfish love and false friendship,
would have continued smooth and complaisant as ever; but I grew spiny as
a porcupine, and inflexible as a blackthorn cudgel; I never had a smile
for his raillery, never a moment for his society; his invitations to
take coffee with him in his parlour were invariably rejected, and
very stiffly and sternly rejected too; his jesting allusions to the
directress (which he still continued) were heard with a grim calm very
different from the petulant pleasure they were formerly wont to excite.
For a long time Pelet bore with my frigid demeanour very patiently;
he even increased his attentions; but finding that even a cringing
politeness failed to thaw or move me, he at last altered too; in
his turn he cooled; his invitations ceased; his countenance became
suspicious and overcast, and I read in the perplexed yet brooding aspect
of his brow, a constant examination and comparison of premises, and an
anxious endeavour to draw thence some explanatory inference. Ere long,
I fancy, he succeeded, for he was not without penetration; perhaps, too,
Mdlle. Zoraide might have aided him in the solution of the enigma; at
any rate I soon found that the uncertainty of doubt had vanished from
his manner; renouncing all pretence of friendship and cordiality, he
adopted a reserved, formal, but still scrupulously polite deportment.
This was the point to which I had wished to bring him, and I was now
again comparatively at my ease. I did not, it is true, like my position
in his house; but being freed from the annoyance of false professions
and double-dealing I could endure it, especially as no heroic sentiment
of hatred or jealousy of the director distracted my philosophical soul;
he had not, I found, wounded me in a very tender point, the wound was so
soon and so radically healed, leaving only a sense of contempt for
the treacherous fashion in which it had been inflicted, and a lasting
mistrust of the hand which I had detected attempting to stab in the
dark.

This state of things continued till about the middle of July, and then
there was a little change; Pelet came home one night, an hour after his
usual time, in a state of unequivocal intoxication, a thing anomalous
with him; for if he had some of the worst faults of his countrymen,
he had also one at least of their virtues, i.e. sobriety. So drunk,
however, was he upon this occasion, that after having roused the whole
establishment (except the pupils, whose dormitory being over the classes
in a building apart from the dwelling-house, was consequently out of the
reach of disturbance) by violently ringing the hall-bell and ordering
lunch to be brought in immediately, for he imagined it was noon, whereas
the city bells had just tolled midnight; after having furiously rated
the servants for their want of punctuality, and gone near to chastise
his poor old mother, who advised him to go to bed, he began raving
dreadfully about "le maudit Anglais, Creemsvort." I had not yet retired;
some German books I had got hold of had kept me up late; I heard the
uproar below, and could distinguish the director's voice exalted in
a manner as appalling as it was unusual. Opening my door a little, I
became aware of a demand on his part for "Creemsvort" to be brought
down to him that he might cut his throat on the hall-table and wash
his honour, which he affirmed to be in a dirty condition, in infernal
British blood. "He is either mad or drunk," thought I, "and in either
case the old woman and the servants will be the better of a man's
assistance," so I descended straight to the hall. I found him staggering
about, his eyes in a fine frenzy rolling--a pretty sight he was, a just
medium between the fool and the lunatic.

"Come, M. Pelet," said I, "you had better go to bed," and I took hold of
his arm. His excitement, of course, increased greatly at sight and touch
of the individual for whose blood he had been making application: he
struggled and struck with fury--but a drunken man is no match for a
sober one; and, even in his normal state, Pelet's worn out frame could
not have stood against my sound one. I got him up-stairs, and, in
process of time, to bed. During the operation he did not fail to
utter comminations which, though broken, had a sense in them; while
stigmatizing me as the treacherous spawn of a perfidious country, he,
in the same breath, anathematized Zoraide Reuter; he termed her "femme
sotte et vicieuse," who, in a fit of lewd caprice, had thrown herself
away on an unprincipled adventurer; directing the point of the last
appellation by a furious blow, obliquely aimed at me. I left him in the
act of bounding elastically out of the bed into which I had tucked him;
but, as I took the precaution of turning the key in the door behind me,
I retired to my own room, assured of his safe custody till the morning,
and free to draw undisturbed conclusions from the scene I had just
witnessed.

Now, it was precisely about this time that the directress, stung by
my coldness, bewitched by my scorn, and excited by the preference she
suspected me of cherishing for another, had fallen into a snare of her
own laying--was herself caught in the meshes of the very passion with
which she wished to entangle me. Conscious of the state of things in
that quarter, I gathered, from the condition in which I saw my
employer, that his lady-love had betrayed the alienation of her
affections--inclinations, rather, I would say; affection is a word at
once too warm and too pure for the subject--had let him see that the
cavity of her hollow heart, emptied of his image, was now occupied by
that of his usher. It was not without some surprise that I found
myself obliged to entertain this view of the case; Pelet, with
his old-established school, was so convenient, so profitable a
match--Zoraide was so calculating, so interested a woman--I wondered
mere personal preference could, in her mind, have prevailed for a moment
over worldly advantage: yet, it was evident, from what Pelet said, that,
not only had she repulsed him, but had even let slip expressions of
partiality for me. One of his drunken exclamations was, "And the
jade doats on your youth, you raw blockhead! and talks of your noble
deportment, as she calls your accursed English formality--and your pure
morals, forsooth! des moeurs de Caton a-t-elle dit--sotte!" Hers, I
thought, must be a curious soul, where in spite of a strong, natural
tendency to estimate unduly advantages of wealth and station, the
sardonic disdain of a fortuneless subordinate had wrought a deeper
impression than could be imprinted by the most flattering assiduities of
a prosperous CHEF D'INSTITUTION. I smiled inwardly; and strange to say,
though my AMOUR PROPRE was excited not disagreeably by the conquest, my
better feelings remained untouched. Next day, when I saw the directress,
and when she made an excuse to meet me in the corridor, and besought my
notice by a demeanour and look subdued to Helot humility, I could
not love, I could scarcely pity her. To answer briefly and dryly
some interesting inquiry about my health--to pass her by with a stern
bow--was all I could; her presence and manner had then, and for some
time previously and consequently, a singular effect upon me: they
sealed up all that was good elicited all that was noxious in my nature;
sometimes they enervated my senses, but they always hardened my heart.
I was aware of the detriment done, and quarrelled with myself for the
change. I had ever hated a tyrant; and, behold, the possession of a
slave, self-given, went near to transform me into what I abhorred!
There was at once a sort of low gratification in receiving this luscious
incense from an attractive and still young worshipper; and an irritating
sense of degradation in the very experience of the pleasure. When she
stole about me with the soft step of a slave, I felt at once barbarous
and sensual as a pasha. I endured her homage sometimes; sometimes I
rebuked it. My indifference or harshness served equally to increase the
evil I desired to check.

"Que le dedain lui sied bien!" I once overheard her say to her mother:
"il est beau comme Apollon quand il sourit de son air hautain."

And the jolly old dame laughed, and said she thought her daughter was
bewitched, for I had no point of a handsome man about me, except being
straight and without deformity. "Pour moi," she continued, "il me fait
tout l'effet d'un chat-huant, avec ses besicles."

Worthy old girl! I could have gone and kissed her had she not been a
little too old, too fat, and too red-faced; her sensible, truthful
words seemed so wholesome, contrasted with the morbid illusions of her
daughter.

When Pelet awoke on the morning after his frenzy fit, he retained no
recollection of what had happened the previous night, and his mother
fortunately had the discretion to refrain from informing him that I had
been a witness of his degradation. He did not again have recourse to
wine for curing his griefs, but even in his sober mood he soon showed
that the iron of jealousy had entered into his soul. A thorough
Frenchman, the national characteristic of ferocity had not been omitted
by nature in compounding the ingredients of his character; it had
appeared first in his access of drunken wrath, when some of his
demonstrations of hatred to my person were of a truly fiendish
character, and now it was more covertly betrayed by momentary
contractions of the features, and flashes of fierceness in his light
blue eyes, when their glance chanced to encounter mine. He absolutely
avoided speaking to me; I was now spared even the falsehood of his
politeness. In this state of our mutual relations, my soul rebelled
sometimes almost ungovernably, against living in the house and
discharging the service of such a man; but who is free from the
constraint of circumstances? At that time, I was not: I used to rise
each morning eager to shake off his yoke, and go out with my portmanteau
under my arm, if a beggar, at least a freeman; and in the evening, when
I came back from the pensionnat de demoiselles, a certain pleasant voice
in my ear; a certain face, so intelligent, yet so docile, so reflective,
yet so soft, in my eyes; a certain cast of character, at once proud
and pliant, sensitive and sagacious, serious and ardent, in my head; a
certain tone of feeling, fervid and modest, refined and practical, pure
and powerful, delighting and troubling my memory--visions of new ties I
longed to contract, of new duties I longed to undertake, had taken the
rover and the rebel out of me, and had shown endurance of my hated lot
in the light of a Spartan virtue.

But Pelet's fury subsided; a fortnight sufficed for its rise, progress,
and extinction: in that space of time the dismissal of the obnoxious
teacher had been effected in the neighbouring house, and in the same
interval I had declared my resolution to follow and find out my pupil,
and upon my application for her address being refused, I had summarily
resigned my own post. This last act seemed at once to restore Mdlle.
Reuter to her senses; her sagacity, her judgment, so long misled by a
fascinating delusion, struck again into the right track the moment
that delusion vanished. By the right track, I do not mean the steep and
difficult path of principle--in that path she never trod; but the plain
highway of common sense, from which she had of late widely diverged.
When there she carefully sought, and having found, industriously pursued
the trail of her old suitor, M. Pelet. She soon overtook him. What arts
she employed to soothe and blind him I know not, but she succeeded both
in allaying his wrath, and hoodwinking his discernment, as was soon
proved by the alteration in his mien and manner; she must have managed
to convince him that I neither was, nor ever had been, a rival of his,
for the fortnight of fury against me terminated in a fit of exceeding
graciousness and amenity, not unmixed with a dash of exulting
self-complacency, more ludicrous than irritating. Pelet's bachelor's
life had been passed in proper French style with due disregard to moral
restraint, and I thought his married life promised to be very French
also. He often boasted to me what a terror he had been to certain
husbands of his acquaintance; I perceived it would not now be difficult
to pay him back in his own coin.

The crisis drew on. No sooner had the holidays commenced than note of
preparation for some momentous event sounded all through the premises
of Pelet: painters, polishers, and upholsterers were immediately set
to work, and there was talk of "la chambre de Madame," "le salon de
Madame." Not deeming it probable that the old duenna at present graced
with that title in our house, had inspired her son with such enthusiasm
of filial piety, as to induce him to fit up apartments expressly for her
use, I concluded, in common with the cook, the two housemaids, and the
kitchen-scullion, that a new and more juvenile Madame was destined to be
the tenant of these gay chambers.

Presently official announcement of the coming event was put forth. In
another week's time M. Francois Pelet, directeur, and Mdlle. Zoraide
Reuter, directrice, were to be joined together in the bands of
matrimony. Monsieur, in person, heralded the fact to me; terminating
his communication by an obliging expression of his desire that I should
continue, as heretofore, his ablest assistant and most trusted friend;
and a proposition to raise my salary by an additional two hundred francs
per annum. I thanked him, gave no conclusive answer at the time, and,
when he had left me, threw off my blouse, put on my coat, and set out
on a long walk outside the Porte de Flandre, in order, as I thought, to
cool my blood, calm my nerves, and shake my disarranged ideas into some
order. In fact, I had just received what was virtually my dismissal.
I could not conceal, I did not desire to conceal from myself the
conviction that, being now certain that Mdlle. Reuter was destined to
become Madame Pelet it would not do for me to remain a dependent dweller
in the house which was soon to be hers. Her present demeanour towards
me was deficient neither in dignity nor propriety; but I knew her former
feeling was unchanged. Decorum now repressed, and Policy masked it, but
Opportunity would be too strong for either of these--Temptation would
shiver their restraints.

I was no pope--I could not boast infallibility: in short, if I stayed,
the probability was that, in three months' time, a practical modern
French novel would be in full process of concoction under the roof of
the unsuspecting Pelet. Now, modern French novels are not to my
taste, either practically or theoretically. Limited as had yet been my
experience of life, I had once had the opportunity of contemplating,
near at hand, an example of the results produced by a course of
interesting and romantic domestic treachery. No golden halo of fiction
was about this example, I saw it bare and real, and it was very
loathsome. I saw a mind degraded by the practice of mean subterfuge, by
the habit of perfidious deception, and a body depraved by the infectious
influence of the vice-polluted soul. I had suffered much from the forced
and prolonged view of this spectacle; those sufferings I did not now
regret, for their simple recollection acted as a most wholesome antidote
to temptation. They had inscribed on my reason the conviction that
unlawful pleasure, trenching on another's rights, is delusive and
envenomed pleasure--its hollowness disappoints at the time, its poison
cruelly tortures afterwards, its effects deprave for ever.

From all this resulted the conclusion that I must leave Pelet's, and
that instantly; "but," said Prudence, "you know not where to go, nor how
to live;" and then the dream of true love came over me: Frances Henri
seemed to stand at my side; her slender waist to invite my arm; her
hand to court my hand; I felt it was made to nestle in mine; I could not
relinquish my right to it, nor could I withdraw my eyes for ever from
hers, where I saw so much happiness, such a correspondence of heart with
heart; over whose expression I had such influence; where I could kindle
bliss, infuse awe, stir deep delight, rouse sparkling spirit, and
sometimes waken pleasurable dread. My hopes to will and possess, my
resolutions to merit and rise, rose in array against me; and here I was
about to plunge into the gulf of absolute destitution; "and all this,"
suggested an inward voice, "because you fear an evil which may never
happen!" "It will happen; you KNOW it will," answered that stubborn
monitor, Conscience. "Do what you feel is right; obey me, and even in
the sloughs of want I will plant for you firm footing." And then, as I
walked fast along the road, there rose upon me a strange, inly-felt idea
of some Great Being, unseen, but all present, who in His beneficence
desired only my welfare, and now watched the struggle of good and evil
in my heart, and waited to see whether I should obey His voice, heard in
the whispers of my conscience, or lend an ear to the sophisms by which
His enemy and mine--the Spirit of Evil--sought to lead me astray.
Rough and steep was the path indicated by divine suggestion; mossy and
declining the green way along which Temptation strewed flowers; but
whereas, methought, the Deity of Love, the Friend of all that exists,
would smile well-pleased were I to gird up my loins and address myself
to the rude ascent; so, on the other hand, each inclination to the
velvet declivity seemed to kindle a gleam of triumph on the brow of the
man-hating, God-defying demon. Sharp and short I turned round; fast I
retraced my steps; in half an hour I was again at M. Pelet's: I sought
him in his study; brief parley, concise explanation sufficed; my manner
proved that I was resolved; he, perhaps, at heart approved my
decision. After twenty minutes' conversation, I re-entered my own room,
self-deprived of the means of living, self-sentenced to leave my present
home, with the short notice of a week in which to provide another.






CHAPTER XXI.

DIRECTLY as I closed the door, I saw laid on the table two letters; my
thought was, that they were notes of invitation from the friends of some
of my pupils; I had received such marks of attention occasionally, and
with me, who had no friends, correspondence of more interest was out
of the question; the postman's arrival had never yet been an event of
interest to me since I came to Brussels. I laid my hand carelessly on
the documents, and coldly and slowly glancing at them, I prepared to
break the seals; my eye was arrested and my hand too; I saw what excited
me, as if I had found a vivid picture where I expected only to discover
a blank page: on one cover was an English postmark; on the other, a
lady's clear, fine autograph; the last I opened first:--

"MONSIEUR,

"I FOUND out what you had done the very morning after your visit to me;
you might be sure I should dust the china, every day; and, as no one but
you had been in my room for a week, and as fairy-money is not current
in Brussels, I could not doubt who left the twenty francs on the
chimney-piece. I thought I heard you stir the vase when I was stooping
to look for your glove under the table, and I wondered you should
imagine it had got into such a little cup. Now, monsieur, the money
is not mine, and I shall not keep it; I will not send it in this note
because it might be lost--besides, it is heavy; but I will restore it
to you the first time I see you, and you must make no difficulties about
taking it; because, in the first place, I am sure, monsieur, you can
understand that one likes to pay one's debts; that it is satisfactory
to owe no man anything; and, in the second place, I can now very well
afford to be honest, as I am provided with a situation. This last
circumstance is, indeed, the reason of my writing to you, for it is
pleasant to communicate good news; and, in these days, I have only my
master to whom I can tell anything.

"A week ago, monsieur, I was sent for by a Mrs. Wharton, an English
lady; her eldest daughter was going to be married, and some rich
relation having made her a present of a veil and dress in costly old
lace, as precious, they said, almost as jewels, but a little damaged by
time, I was commissioned to put them in repair. I had to do it at the
house; they gave me, besides, some embroidery to complete, and nearly
a week elapsed before I had finished everything. While I worked, Miss
Wharton often came into the room and sat with me, and so did Mrs.
Wharton; they made me talk English; asked how I had learned to speak it
so well; then they inquired what I knew besides--what books I had read;
soon they seemed to make a sort of wonder of me, considering me no doubt
as a learned grisette. One afternoon, Mrs. Wharton brought in a Parisian
lady to test the accuracy of my knowledge of French; the result of
it was that, owing probably in a great degree to the mother's and
daughter's good humour about the marriage, which inclined them to
do beneficent deeds, and partly, I think, because they are naturally
benevolent people, they decided that the wish I had expressed to do
something more than mend lace was a very legitimate one; and the same
day they took me in their carriage to Mrs. D.'s, who is the directress
of the first English school at Brussels. It seems she happened to be in
want of a French lady to give lessons in geography, history, grammar,
and composition, in the French language. Mrs. Wharton recommended me
very warmly; and, as two of her younger daughters are pupils in the
house, her patronage availed to get me the place. It was settled that I
am to attend six hours daily (for, happily, it was not required that
I should live in the house; I should have been sorry to leave my
lodgings), and, for this, Mrs. D. will give me twelve hundred francs per
annum.

"You see, therefore, monsieur, that I am now rich; richer almost than
I ever hoped to be: I feel thankful for it, especially as my sight was
beginning to be injured by constant working at fine lace; and I was
getting, too, very weary of sitting up late at nights, and yet not being
able to find time for reading or study. I began to fear that I should
fall ill, and be unable to pay my way; this fear is now, in a great
measure, removed; and, in truth, monsieur, I am very grateful to God for
the relief; and I feel it necessary, almost, to speak of my happiness
to some one who is kind-hearted enough to derive joy from seeing others
joyful. I could not, therefore, resist the temptation of writing to you;
I argued with myself it is very pleasant for me to write, and it will
not be exactly painful, though it may be tiresome to monsieur to
read. Do not be too angry with my circumlocution and inelegancies of
expression, and, believe me

"Your attached pupil,

"F. E. HENRI."

Having read this letter, I mused on its contents for a few
moments--whether with sentiments pleasurable or otherwise I will
hereafter note--and then took up the other. It was directed in a hand
to me unknown--small, and rather neat; neither masculine nor exactly
feminine; the seal bore a coat of arms, concerning which I could only
decipher that it was not that of the Seacombe family, consequently the
epistle could be from none of my almost forgotten, and certainly quite
forgetting patrician relations. From whom, then, was it? I removed the
envelope; the note folded within ran as follows:

"I have no doubt in the world that you are doing well in that greasy
Flanders; living probably on the fat of the unctuous land; sitting like
a black-haired, tawny-skinned, long-nosed Israelite by the flesh-pots
of Egypt; or like a rascally son of Levi near the brass cauldrons of the
sanctuary, and every now and then plunging in a consecrated hook, and
drawing out of the sea of broth the fattest of heave-shoulders and the
fleshiest of wave-breasts. I know this, because you never write to any
one in England. Thankless dog that you are! I, by the sovereign efficacy
of my recommendation, got you the place where you are now living in
clover, and yet not a word of gratitude, or even acknowledgment, have
you ever offered in return; but I am coming to see you, and small
conception can you, with your addled aristocratic brains, form of the
sort of moral kicking I have, ready packed in my carpet-bag, destined to
be presented to you immediately on my arrival.

"Meantime I know all about your affairs, and have just got information,
by Brown's last letter, that you are said to be on the point of forming
an advantageous match with a pursy, little Belgian schoolmistress--a
Mdlle. Zenobie, or some such name. Won't I have a look at her when I
come over! And this you may rely on: if she pleases my taste, or if I
think it worth while in a pecuniary point of view, I'll pounce on your
prize and bear her away triumphant in spite of your teeth. Yet I don't
like dumpies either, and Brown says she is little and stout--the better
fitted for a wiry, starved-looking chap like you. "Be on the look-out,
for you know neither the day nor hour when your ----" (I don't wish to
blaspheme, so I'll leave a blank)--cometh.

"Yours truly,

"HUNSDEN YORKE HUNSDEN."

"Humph!" said I; and ere I laid the letter down, I again glanced at the
small, neat handwriting, not a bit like that of a mercantile man, nor,
indeed, of any man except Hunsden himself. They talk of affinities
between the autograph and the character: what affinity was there here?
I recalled the writer's peculiar face and certain traits I suspected,
rather than knew, to appertain to his nature, and I answered, "A great
deal."

Hunsden, then, was coming to Brussels, and coming I knew not when;
coming charged with the expectation of finding me on the summit of
prosperity, about to be married, to step into a warm nest, to lie
comfortably down by the side of a snug, well-fed little mate.

"I wish him joy of the fidelity of the picture he has painted," thought
I. "What will he say when, instead of a pair of plump turtle doves,
billing and cooing in a bower of roses, he finds a single lean
cormorant, standing mateless and shelterless on poverty's bleak cliff?
Oh, confound him! Let him come, and let him laugh at the contrast
between rumour and fact. Were he the devil himself, instead of being
merely very like him, I'd not condescend to get out of his way, or to
forge a smile or a cheerful word wherewith to avert his sarcasm."

Then I recurred to the other letter: that struck a chord whose sound I
could not deaden by thrusting my fingers into my ears, for it vibrated
within; and though its swell might be exquisite music, its cadence was a
groan.

That Frances was relieved from the pressure of want, that the curse of
excessive labour was taken off her, filled me with happiness; that her
first thought in prosperity should be to augment her joy by sharing
it with me, met and satisfied the wish of my heart. Two results of her
letter were then pleasant, sweet as two draughts of nectar; but applying
my lips for the third time to the cup, and they were excoriated as with
vinegar and gall.

Two persons whose desires are moderate may live well enough in Brussels
on an income which would scarcely afford a respectable maintenance for
one in London: and that, not because the necessaries of life are so
much dearer in the latter capital, or taxes so much higher than in the
former, but because the English surpass in folly all the nations on
God's earth, and are more abject slaves to custom, to opinion, to
the desire to keep up a certain appearance, than the Italians are to
priestcraft, the French to vain-glory, the Russians to their Czar, or
the Germans to black beer. I have seen a degree of sense in the modest
arrangement of one homely Belgian household, that might put to shame the
elegance, the superfluities, the luxuries, the strained refinements of
a hundred genteel English mansions. In Belgium, provided you can
make money, you may save it; this is scarcely possible in England;
ostentation there lavishes in a month what industry has earned in a
year. More shame to all classes in that most bountiful and beggarly
country for their servile following of Fashion; I could write a chapter
or two on this subject, but must forbear, at least for the present. Had
I retained my 60l. per annum I could, now that Frances was in possession
of 50l., have gone straight to her this very evening, and spoken out the
words which, repressed, kept fretting my heart with fever; our united
income would, as we should have managed it, have sufficed well for
our mutual support; since we lived in a country where economy was not
confounded with meanness, where frugality in dress, food, and furniture,
was not synonymous with vulgarity in these various points. But the
placeless usher, bare of resource, and unsupported by connections, must
not think of this; such a sentiment as love, such a word as marriage,
were misplaced in his heart, and on his lips. Now for the first time did
I truly feel what it was to be poor; now did the sacrifice I had made
in casting from me the means of living put on a new aspect; instead of
a correct, just, honourable act, it seemed a deed at once light and
fanatical; I took several turns in my room, under the goading influence
of most poignant remorse; I walked a quarter of an hour from the wall to
the window; and at the window, self-reproach seemed to face me; at the
wall, self-disdain: all at once out spoke Conscience:--

"Down, stupid tormenters!" cried she; "the man has done his duty;
you shall not bait him thus by thoughts of what might have been; he
relinquished a temporary and contingent good to avoid a permanent and
certain evil he did well. Let him reflect now, and when your blinding
dust and deafening hum subside, he will discover a path."

I sat down; I propped my forehead on both my hands; I thought and
thought an hour--two hours; vainly. I seemed like one sealed in a
subterranean vault, who gazes at utter blackness; at blackness ensured
by yard-thick stone walls around, and by piles of building above,
expecting light to penetrate through granite, and through cement firm
as granite. But there are chinks, or there may be chinks, in the
best adjusted masonry; there was a chink in my cavernous cell; for,
eventually, I saw, or seemed to see, a ray--pallid, indeed, and cold,
and doubtful, but still a ray, for it showed that narrow path which
conscience had promised after two, three hours' torturing research in
brain and memory, I disinterred certain remains of circumstances, and
conceived a hope that by putting them together an expedient might be
framed, and a resource discovered. The circumstances were briefly these:

Some three months ago M. Pelet had, on the occasion of his fete, given
the boys a treat, which treat consisted in a party of pleasure to a
certain place of public resort in the outskirts of Brussels, of which
I do not at this moment remember the name, but near it were several of
those lakelets called etangs; and there was one etang, larger than the
rest, where on holidays people were accustomed to amuse themselves by
rowing round it in little boats. The boys having eaten an unlimited
quantity of "gaufres," and drank several bottles of Louvain beer, amid
the shades of a garden made and provided for such crams, petitioned
the director for leave to take a row on the etang. Half a dozen of the
eldest succeeded in obtaining leave, and I was commissioned to accompany
them as surveillant. Among the half dozen happened to be a certain Jean
Baptiste Vandenhuten, a most ponderous young Flamand, not tall, but
even now, at the early age of sixteen, possessing a breadth and depth of
personal development truly national. It chanced that Jean was the first
lad to step into the boat; he stumbled, rolled to one side, the boat
revolted at his weight and capsized. Vandenhuten sank like lead, rose,
sank again. My coat and waistcoat were off in an instant; I had not been
brought up at Eton and boated and bathed and swam there ten long years
for nothing; it was a natural and easy act for me to leap to the rescue.
The lads and the boatmen yelled; they thought there would be two deaths
by drowning instead of one; but as Jean rose the third time, I clutched
him by one leg and the collar, and in three minutes more both he and I
were safe landed. To speak heaven's truth, my merit in the action was
small indeed, for I had run no risk, and subsequently did not even catch
cold from the wetting; but when M. and Madame Vandenhuten, of whom Jean
Baptiste was the sole hope, came to hear of the exploit, they seemed
to think I had evinced a bravery and devotion which no thanks could
sufficiently repay. Madame, in particular, was "certain I must have
dearly loved their sweet son, or I would not thus have hazarded my own
life to save his." Monsieur, an honest-looking, though phlegmatic man,
said very little, but he would not suffer me to leave the room, till
I had promised that in case I ever stood in need of help I would, by
applying to him, give him a chance of discharging the obligation under
which he affirmed I had laid him. These words, then, were my glimmer of
light; it was here I found my sole outlet; and in truth, though the cold
light roused, it did not cheer me; nor did the outlet seem such as I
should like to pass through. Right I had none to M. Vandenhuten's good
offices; it was not on the ground of merit I could apply to him; no, I
must stand on that of necessity: I had no work; I wanted work; my best
chance of obtaining it lay in securing his recommendation. This I knew
could be had by asking for it; not to ask, because the request revolted
my pride and contradicted my habits, would, I felt, be an indulgence of
false and indolent fastidiousness. I might repent the omission all my
life; I would not then be guilty of it.

That evening I went to M. Vandenhuten's; but I had bent the bow and
adjusted the shaft in vain; the string broke. I rang the bell at the
great door (it was a large, handsome house in an expensive part of the
town); a manservant opened; I asked for M. Vandenhuten; M. Vandenhuten
and family were all out of town--gone to Ostend--did not know when they
would be back. I left my card, and retraced my steps.






CHAPTER XXII

A WEEK is gone; LE JOUR DES NOCES arrived; the marriage was solemnized
at St. Jacques; Mdlle. Zoraide became Madame Pelet, NEE Reuter; and, in
about an hour after this transformation, "the happy pair," as newspapers
phrase it, were on their way to Paris; where, according to previous
arrangement, the honeymoon was to be spent. The next day I quitted the
pensionnat. Myself and my chattels (some books and clothes) were soon
transferred to a modest lodging I had hired in a street not far off. In
half an hour my clothes were arranged in a commode, my books on a shelf,
and the "flitting" was effected. I should not have been unhappy that day
had not one pang tortured me--a longing to go to the Rue Notre Dame
aux Neiges, resisted, yet irritated by an inward resolve to avoid
that street till such time as the mist of doubt should clear from my
prospects.

It was a sweet September evening--very mild, very still; I had nothing
to do; at that hour I knew Frances would be equally released from
occupation; I thought she might possibly be wishing for her master, I
knew I wished for my pupil. Imagination began with her low whispers,
infusing into my soul the soft tale of pleasures that might be.

"You will find her reading or writing," said she; "you can take your
seat at her side; you need not startle her peace by undue excitement;
you need not embarrass her manner by unusual action or language. Be as
you always are; look over what she has written; listen while she reads;
chide her, or quietly approve; you know the effect of either system; you
know her smile when pleased, you know the play of her looks when roused;
you have the secret of awakening what expression you will, and you can
choose amongst that pleasant variety. With you she will sit silent as
long as it suits you to talk alone; you can hold her under a potent
spell: intelligent as she is, eloquent as she can be, you can seal her
lips, and veil her bright countenance with diffidence; yet, you know,
she is not all monotonous mildness; you have seen, with a sort of
strange pleasure, revolt, scorn, austerity, bitterness, lay energetic
claim to a place in her feelings and physiognomy; you know that few
could rule her as you do; you know she might break, but never bend under
the hand of Tyranny and Injustice, but Reason and Affection can guide
her by a sign. Try their influence now. Go--they are not passions; you
may handle them safely."

"I will NOT go was my answer to the sweet temptress. A man is master
of himself to a certain point, but not beyond it. Could I seek Frances
to-night, could I sit with her alone in a quiet room, and address her
only in the language of Reason and Affection?"

"No," was the brief, fervent reply of that Love which had conquered and
now controlled me.

Time seemed to stagnate; the sun would not go down; my watch ticked, but
I thought the hands were paralyzed.

"What a hot evening!" I cried, throwing open the lattice; for, indeed, I
had seldom felt so feverish. Hearing a step ascending the common stair,
I wondered whether the "locataire," now mounting to his apartments, were
as unsettled in mind and condition as I was, or whether he lived in the
calm of certain resources, and in the freedom of unfettered feelings.
What! was he coming in person to solve the problem hardly proposed in
inaudible thought? He had actually knocked at the door--at MY door; a
smart, prompt rap; and, almost before I could invite him in, he was over
the threshold, and had closed the door behind him.

"And how are you?" asked an indifferent, quiet voice, in the English
language; while my visitor, without any sort of bustle or introduction,
put his hat on the table, and his gloves into his hat, and drawing
the only armchair the room afforded a little forward, seated himself
tranquilly therein.

"Can't you speak?" he inquired in a few moments, in a tone whose
nonchalance seemed to intimate that it was much the same thing whether
I answered or not. The fact is, I found it desirable to have recourse to
my good friends "les besicles;" not exactly to ascertain the identity of
my visitor--for I already knew him, confound his impudence! but to see
how he looked--to get a clear notion of his mien and countenance.
I wiped the glasses very deliberately, and put them on quite as
deliberately; adjusting them so as not to hurt the bridge of my nose
or get entangled in my short tufts of dun hair. I was sitting in the
window-seat, with my back to the light, and I had him VIS-A-VIS; a
position he would much rather have had reversed; for, at any time, he
preferred scrutinizing to being scrutinized. Yes, it was HE, and no
mistake, with his six feet of length arranged in a sitting attitude;
with his dark travelling surtout with its velvet collar, his gray
pantaloons, his black stock, and his face, the most original one Nature
ever modelled, yet the least obtrusively so; not one feature that could
be termed marked or odd, yet the effect of the whole unique. There is no
use in attempting to describe what is indescribable. Being in no hurry
to address him, I sat and stared at my ease.

"Oh, that's your game--is it?" said he at last. "Well, we'll see which
is soonest tired." And he slowly drew out a fine cigar-case, picked one
to his taste, lit it, took a book from the shelf convenient to his hand,
then leaning back, proceeded to smoke and read as tranquilly as if he
had been in his own room, in Grove-street, X---shire, England. I knew
he was capable of continuing in that attitude till midnight, if he
conceived the whim, so I rose, and taking the book from his hand, I
said,--

"You did not ask for it, and you shall not have it."

"It is silly and dull," he observed, "so I have not lost much;" then the
spell being broken, he went on: "I thought you lived at Pelet's; I went
there this afternoon expecting to be starved to death by sitting in
a boarding-school drawing-room, and they told me you were gone, had
departed this morning; you had left your address behind you though,
which I wondered at; it was a more practical and sensible precaution
than I should have imagined you capable of. Why did you leave?"

"Because M. Pelet has just married the lady whom you and Mr. Brown
assigned to me as my wife."

"Oh, indeed!" replied Hunsden with a short laugh; "so you've lost both
your wife and your place?"

"Precisely so."

I saw him give a quick, covert glance all round my room; he marked its
narrow limits, its scanty furniture: in an instant he had comprehended
the state of matters--had absolved me from the crime of prosperity. A
curious effect this discovery wrought in his strange mind; I am morally
certain that if he had found me installed in a handsome parlour,
lounging on a soft couch, with a pretty, wealthy wife at my side, he
would have hated me; a brief, cold, haughty visit, would in such a case
have been the extreme limit of his civilities, and never would he have
come near me more, so long as the tide of fortune bore me smoothly on
its surface; but the painted furniture, the bare walls, the cheerless
solitude of my room relaxed his rigid pride, and I know not what
softening change had taken place both in his voice and look ere he spoke
again.

"You have got another place?"

"No."

"You are in the way of getting one?"

"No."

"That is bad; have you applied to Brown?"

"No, indeed."

"You had better; he often has it in his power to give useful information
in such matters."

"He served me once very well; I have no claim on him, and am not in the
humour to bother him again."

"Oh, if you're bashful, and dread being intrusive, you need only
commission me. I shall see him to-night; I can put in a word."

"I beg you will not, Mr. Hunsden; I am in your debt already; you did me
an important service when I was at X----; got me out of a den where I
was dying: that service I have never repaid, and at present I decline
positively adding another item to the account."

"If the wind sits that way, I'm satisfied. I thought my unexampled
generosity in turning you out of that accursed counting-house would be
duly appreciated some day: 'Cast your bread on the waters, and it
shall be found after many days,' say the Scriptures. Yes, that's right,
lad--make much of me--I'm a nonpareil: there's nothing like me in the
common herd. In the meantime, to put all humbug aside and talk sense for
a few moments, you would be greatly the better of a situation, and what
is more, you are a fool if you refuse to take one from any hand that
offers it."

"Very well, Mr. Hunsden; now you have settled that point, talk of
something else. What news from X----?"

"I have not settled that point, or at least there is another to settle
before we get to X----. Is this Miss Zenobie" (Zoraide, interposed
I)--"well, Zoraide--is she really married to Pelet?"

"I tell you yes--and if you don't believe me, go and ask the cure of St.
Jacques."

"And your heart is broken?"

"I am not aware that it is; it feels all right--beats as usual."

"Then your feelings are less superfine than I took them to be; you must
be a coarse, callous character, to bear such a thwack without staggering
under it."

"Staggering under it? What the deuce is there to stagger under in the
circumstance of a Belgian schoolmistress marrying a French schoolmaster?
The progeny will doubtless be a strange hybrid race; but that's their
look-out--not mine."

"He indulges in scurrilous jests, and the bride was his affianced one!"

"Who said so?"

"Brown."

"I'll tell you what, Hunsden--Brown is an old gossip."

"He is; but in the meantime, if his gossip be founded on less than
fact--if you took no particular interest in Miss Zoraide--why, O
youthful pedagogue! did you leave your place in consequence of her
becoming Madame Pelet?"

"Because--" I felt my face grow a little hot; "because--in short, Mr.
Hunsden, I decline answering any more questions," and I plunged my hands
deep in my breeches pocket.

Hunsden triumphed: his eyes--his laugh announced victory.

"What the deuce are you laughing at, Mr. Hunsden?"

"At your exemplary composure. Well, lad, I'll not bore you; I see how
it is: Zoraide has jilted you--married some one richer, as any sensible
woman would have done if she had had the chance."

I made no reply--I let him think so, not feeling inclined to enter into
an explanation of the real state of things, and as little to forge a
false account; but it was not easy to blind Hunsden; my very silence,
instead of convincing him that he had hit the truth, seemed to render
him doubtful about it; he went on:--

"I suppose the affair has been conducted as such affairs always
are amongst rational people: you offered her your youth and your
talents--such as they are--in exchange for her position and money: I
don't suppose you took appearance, or what is called LOVE, into the
account--for I understand she is older than you, and Brown says, rather
sensible-looking than beautiful. She, having then no chance of making
a better bargain, was at first inclined to come to terms with you, but
Pelet--the head of a flourishing school--stepped in with a higher bid;
she accepted, and he has got her: a correct transaction--perfectly
so--business-like and legitimate. And now we'll talk of something else."

"Do," said I, very glad to dismiss the topic, and especially glad to
have baffled the sagacity of my cross-questioner--if, indeed, I had
baffled it; for though his words now led away from the dangerous point,
his eyes, keen and watchful, seemed still preoccupied with the former
idea.

"You want to hear news from X----? And what interest can you have in
X----? You left no friends there, for you made none. Nobody ever asks
after you--neither man nor woman; and if I mention your name in company,
the men look as if I had spoken of Prester John; and the women sneer
covertly. Our X---- belles must have disliked you. How did you excite
their displeasure?"

"I don't know. I seldom spoke to them--they were nothing to me. I
considered them only as something to be glanced at from a distance;
their dresses and faces were often pleasing enough to the eye: but
I could not understand their conversation, nor even read their
countenances. When I caught snatches of what they said, I could never
make much of it; and the play of their lips and eyes did not help me at
all."

"That was your fault, not theirs. There are sensible, as well as
handsome women in X----; women it is worth any man's while to talk to,
and with whom I can talk with pleasure: but you had and have no pleasant
address; there is nothing in you to induce a woman to be affable. I have
remarked you sitting near the door in a room full of company, bent on
hearing, not on speaking; on observing, not on entertaining; looking
frigidly shy at the commencement of a party, confusingly vigilant about
the middle, and insultingly weary towards the end. Is that the way, do
you think, ever to communicate pleasure or excite interest? No; and if
you are generally unpopular, it is because you deserve to be so."

"Content!" I ejaculated.

"No, you are not content; you see beauty always turning its back on
you; you are mortified and then you sneer. I verily believe all that is
desirable on earth--wealth, reputation, love--will for ever to you be
the ripe grapes on the high trellis: you'll look up at them; they will
tantalize in you the lust of the eye; but they are out of reach: you
have not the address to fetch a ladder, and you'll go away calling them
sour."

Cutting as these words might have been under some circumstances, they
drew no blood now. My life was changed; my experience had been varied
since I left X----, but Hunsden could not know this; he had seen me only
in the character of Mr. Crimsworth's clerk--a dependant amongst wealthy
strangers, meeting disdain with a hard front, conscious of an unsocial
and unattractive exterior, refusing to sue for notice which I was sure
would be withheld, declining to evince an admiration which I knew would
be scorned as worthless. He could not be aware that since then youth and
loveliness had been to me everyday objects; that I had studied them at
leisure and closely, and had seen the plain texture of truth under
the embroidery of appearance; nor could he, keen-sighted as he
was, penetrate into my heart, search my brain, and read my peculiar
sympathies and antipathies; he had not known me long enough, or well
enough, to perceive how low my feelings would ebb under some influences,
powerful over most minds; how high, how fast they would flow under
other influences, that perhaps acted with the more intense force on me,
